KEY ADVANCES IN THE HISTORY OF STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODELING

Ross L. Matsueda
University of Washington
Revised
June 25, 2011
Working Paper no. 114
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
University of Washington

Forthcoming in Handbook of Structural Equation Modeling. 2012. Edited by R. Hoyle. New
York, NY: Guilford Press

Direct all correspondence to Ross L. Matsueda, Department of Sociology, Box 353340,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, email: matsueda@u.washington.edu. The author
received support from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (1 R01 DA018148-01A), the
National Science Foundation (SES-0966662), and the Blumstein-Jordan Endowed Professorship
in Sociology. I thank Maria Grigoryeva for assistance and comments, Jerry Herting for his lively
conversations and SEM books, and Adrian Raftery, Michael Sobel, Lowell Hargens, Ken Bollen,
David Gow, and Richard Callahan for comments on an earlier draft. All remaining errors are
those of the author.

KEY ADVANCES IN THE HISTORY OF STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODELING1
Ross L. Matsueda
Structural equation modeling (SEM) has advanced considerably in the social sciences. The
direction of advances has varied by the substantive problems faced by individual disciplines. For
example, path analysis developed to model inheritance in population genetics, and later to model
status attainment in sociology. Factor analysis developed in psychology to explore the structure
of intelligence, and simultaneous equation models developed in economics to examine supply
and demand.
These largely discipline-specific advances came together in the early 1970s to create a
multidisciplinary approach to SEM. Later, during the 1980s, responding to criticisms of SEM
for failing to meet assumptions implied by maximum likelihood estimation and testing, SEM
proponents responded with estimators for data that departed from multivariate normality, and for
modeling categorical, ordinal, and limited dependent variables. More recently, advances in SEM
have incorporated additional statistical models (growth models, latent class growth models,
generalized linear models, and multi-level models), drawn upon artificial intelligence research to
attempt to “discover” causal structures, and finally, returned to the question of causality with
formal methods for specifying assumptions necessary for inferring causality with nonexperimental data.
In this chapter, I trace the key advances in the history of structural equation modeling. I
focus on the early history, and try to convey the excitement of major developments in each
discipline, culminating with cross-disciplinary integration in the 1970s. I then discuss advances
1

Direct all correspondence to Ross L. Matsueda, Department of Sociology, Box 353340, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195, email: matsueda@u.washington.edu. The author received support from the National Institute on
Drug Abuse (1 R01 DA018148-01A), the National Science Foundation (SES-0966662), and the Blumstein-Jordan
Endowed Professorship in Sociology. I thank Maria Grigoryeva for assistance and comments, Jerry Herting for his
lively conversations and SEM books, and Adrian Raftery, Michael Sobel, Lowell Hargens, Ken Bollen, David Gow,
and Richard Callahan for comments on an earlier draft. All remaining errors are those of the author.

2
in estimating models from data that depart from the usual assumptions of linearity, normality,
and continuous distributions. I conclude with brief treatments of more recent advances to
provide introductions to advanced chapters in this volume.
EARLY HISTORY: THE DISCIPLINARY ROOTS OF SEM
Sewall Wright’s Path Analysis in Genetics and Biology
In 1918, Sewall Wright, a young geneticist, published the first application of path analysis,
which modeled the bone size of rabbits. After computing all possible partial correlations of his
measures, he was still dissatisfied with the results, which remained far from a causal explanation.
Consequently, Wright developed path analysis to impose a causal structure, with structural
coefficients, on the observed correlations. His substantive application decomposed the variation
in the size of an individual bone to various hereditary causes (Hill 1995). He subsequently
applied path analysis to systems of mating, using data on guinea pigs, which laid the basis for
much of subsequent population genetics. For example, in modeling the proportion of white color
in spotted guinea pigs, Wright (1920) decomposed the variance into heredity (h), common
environment for the litter (e), and other factors such as developmental noise (d). The path
coefficient (h) represents the link between genotype and phenotype, and h2 is the proportion of
variance due to heredity, later termed “heritability” in population genetics. Wright also
developed models for systems of mating, showing the consequences of continued inbreeding
systems, such as continued brother-sister mating, which results in m = r’00, where m is the
correlation between mates in one generation, and r’00 is the correlation between brother and
sister of the previous generation (Li 1956). He also derived results for intergenerational
consequences of assortative mating. Figure 1 reproduces a path diagram of environment and
heredity, which Hill (1995:1500) calls “surely one of the best known diagrams in biological
science.”

3
Wright (1921a, 1934) presented the method of path analysis for estimating causal relations
among variables based on the correlation matrix of observed variables, emphasizing path
coefficients (standardized regression coefficients) but also using “path regressions”
(unstandardized coefficients). He invented a graphical method of presenting causal relations
using path diagrams, consisting of variable labels connected by arrows for direct effects, doubleheaded arrows for unanalyzed correlations, and the estimated path coefficients listed over singleheaded arrows. From path diagrams, Wright could read off total, direct, and indirect effects, and
quickly decompose correlations into various causal sources, such as direct effects, indirect
effects, common causes, and the like. Among the models Wright estimated by path analysis was
a model of multiple causal indicators, or what later became known as the MIMIC model.
Wright’s estimation method was essentially the method of moments, which follows the intuitive
principle of estimating a population moment (or function of moments) using the sample analog
moment (or function of moments) (Goldberger 1991). Although he lacked a principle for
reconciling multiple ways of expressing a path coefficient in terms of sample moments in
overidentified models, he did check to see if they were close and acknowledged the potential
gains in efficiency and reduced standard errors from using full information (Goldberger 1972a).
While working for the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Wright (1925) worked on corn and
hog correlations, developing a complex, highly-overidentified, recursive system of equations
containing observed, unobserved, lagged, and un-lagged variables, to describe seasonal data on
hog breeding, corn prices, and hog prices. The Department of Agriculture rejected publication of
the monograph on the grounds that “an animal husbandman” (Wright’s position at the time) “had
no business writing about economics” (Crow 1988). Wright’s research was only published after
Henry Wallace read the paper and exploited the influence of his father, then Secretary of
Agriculture. Although the recursive model had no explicit demand function, Wright (1925:54)

4
noted in a footnote that a direct negative effect of hog quantity on hog price would be desirable
but the “treatment of such reciprocal relations between variables requires an extension of the
theory of path coefficients” (see Goldberger 1972a:983).
In 1928, Sewall Wright’s father, economist Phillip Wright, published a study of the tariff,
which included an appendix—the infamous “Appendix B”—that applied instrumental variables
and path analysis to reciprocal relations between variables. Most scholars presume that the
appendix was co-authored with Sewall Wright, although Stock and Trebbi (2003) suggest that
Phillip may have been sole author.2 Phillip Wright, who had mentioned the identification
problem as early as 1915 (Wright 1915), and presented it in graphical form of supply and
demand curves, wrote out what later became known as the reduced form equations:
P  p1

P

D  p2 P S
D
S

(1)

Q  q1

Q

D  q2 Q S
D
S

(2)

where D and S indicate shifts in demand and supply curves after transforming P and Q to trend
ratios, and σ’s represent standard deviations of variables. Wright (1928) noted that the two
equations contain four unknowns. They then suggested that if two external variables, A and B,
could be found (based on external knowledge of markets) such that A were correlated with D but
not S, and B were correlated with S but not D, the principles of path analysis would yield
solutions for the four unknowns. Wright had arrived at a more general treatment than offered by
Henry Schultz that year (1928) or “indeed in 1938” (Goldberger 1972a:984). Sewell Wright
(1934) later developed more general solutions, noting that a mere single external variable is

2

Stock and Trebbi (2003) conduct a stylometric (grammar and writing style) analysis using principal components
and discriminant analysis that points to Phillip as the writer. Because one solution used path analysis, it is likely that
the two Wrights collaborated—they had done so earlier—although Stock and Trebbi note that Phillip did not
mention his son Sewall in his acknowledgements, as he had done in earlier publcations.

5
sufficient if the supply and demand situations were uncorrelated—that is, the disturbances of the
two equations were orthogonal—and also that, in very complex models with many more shifts
than external variables, one could solve for parameters by assuming plausible values for some of
the unknowns (see Epstein 1987). This solution to the simultaneous equation problem would be
rediscovered by Rejersøl (1945, cited in Morgan 1990), who used the term, “instrumental
variable estimates” (which he attributed to Frisch).
At this time, Wright’s (1934) path analysis was largely ignored not only in biology but
statistics as well, perhaps in part because it contained elements “that were objectionable” to the
two dominant schools of statistics (Shipley 2000:70):
The Phenomenalist school of Pearson disliked Wright’s notion that one should distinguish
“causes” from correlations. The Realist school of Fisher disliked Wright’s notion that one
could study causes by looking at correlations. Professional statisticians therefore ignored it.
And applied biologists were drawn to Fisher’s methods, which included inferential statistics,
were rooted in experimental design, and were easier to understand (Shipley 2000). Later,
Wright’s path models became foundational for much of population genetics (Li 1956).
Causal Models and Path Analysis in Sociology
Perhaps the earliest reference to path analysis by a sociologist appeared in an appendix to
Blalock’s (1961a:191-93) classic treatment of causal inferences in nonexperimental research,
where he briefly discussed “some related approaches,” and concludes that path analysis “might
readily be extended so as to be highly useful in the less precise nonexperimental sciences.”3
Blalock had spearheaded a voluminous literature in sociology on causal models in the 1960s by
elaborating on Simon’s (1954) method of making causal inferences from correlational data.

3

In an essay titled “What if?” Duncan (1992) wondered whether, if he had sooner convinced Blalock that Sewall
Wright’s path analysis could solve Simon’s questions, Blalock’s appendix would have been more complete and
Duncan would have lost motivation to write his later 1966 article.

6
Building on Yule’s (1896)) original method of ruling out common causes using partial
correlations, Simon (1954) began by noting that a zero partial correlation ( rxy . z  0 ) between
independent variable, x, and dependent variable, y, holding z constant implies a spurious
correlation between x and y when z (a confounder) is causally-prior to x and y. However, when z
is causally-prior to x and causally-subsequent to y, z is an intervening variable between x and y.
Simon (1954:41) correctly asserted that the determination of whether a partial correlation is or is
not spurious “can only be reached if a priori assumptions are made that certain other causal
relations do not hold among the variables”—namely exclusionary restrictions on coefficients and
uncorrelated errors in equations. He then went on to expound on these conditions in all possible
three-variable models. Blalock (1961b, 1962) extended this method to a five-variable model and
then to an exhaustive exposition of the four-variable case. Later, Boudon (1965) applied these
results to path coefficients, drawing from Wright (1934), but renaming them “dependence
coefficients.”
But it was Duncan’s (1966) classic expository article, “Path analysis: Sociological
Examples,” and his monumental monograph with Peter Blau, The American Occupational
Structure (Blau and Duncan 1967) that launched the path analysis movement in sociology, and
later, in political science. Duncan (1966) used published correlations to apply path analysis to
recursive models of class values, population density, occupational prestige, and synthetic
cohorts. Subsequently, Costner (1969) and Blalock (1969) used path analysis to address
multiple-indicator causal models, and in particular, to find that tetrad-difference restrictions on
observed correlations provide a way of testing models—a result that emerged from factor
analysis in psychology. These papers made important insights into substantive population
models, although they tended to gloss over sample-population distinctions, efficient estimation,
and formal hypothesis testing.

7
Substantively, Duncan and Hodge (1963) had earlier published a four-variable status
attainment model on data from Chicago, in which son’s education intervened between the effects
of father’s occupation on son’s occupation in 1940 and 1950. They estimated the models using
equation-by-equation multiple regression. Blau and Duncan’s (1967) monograph expanded on
this model by using national data, distinguishing between hierarchies of occupations and rewards
from the process by which individual characteristics sort people into those occupations, and
examining whether the American stratification system approximated an open opportunity
structure more than a rigid class hierarchy. The study produced an explosion of productive
research using path analysis to model status attainment, most notably the Wisconsin status
attainment model (e.g., Sewell and Hauser 1975).
Factor Analysis in Psychology
In psychology, interest in SEM originated in factor analysis, which is a statistical method for
analyzing a correlation or covariance matrix of observed variables to identify a small number of
factors, components, or latent variables, that contain the essential information in the original
variables. Thus, the primary goal is to attain “scientific parsimony or economy of description”
(Harman 1960:4). The method was originally developed to model psychological theories of
ability and behavior. Spearman (1904) is often credited as the founding father of factor analysis,
although earlier, Pearson (1901a) published a paper on fitting planes by orthogonal least
squares—the foundation for principal component analysis—which was later applied to the
analysis of correlation matrices by Hotelling (1933). Spearman’s work on factor analysis
derived explicitly from his work on intelligence testing. He specified a two-factor theory of
intelligence, in which all mental processes involved a general factor, g, plus specific factor, s.
The general factor enters all activities—some more than others—while the specific factors were
unique to the task at hand (the specific mental activity). Spearman claimed that the disparate

8
items from intelligence tests would reveal two factors: a general factor and an item-specific
factor. Moreover, Spearman (1927) showed that four variables cannot be described by a single
factor unless their intercorrelations satisfy the conditions of two vanishing tetrad differences:4
r12 r34  r14 r23  0

(3)

r13r24  r14 r23  0

(4)

Criticisms of the two-factor theory of intelligence on theoretical as well as empirical
grounds—tetrads often failed to vanish or, equivalently, correlation matrices failed to be of unitrank, even after considering sampling error—led to interest in multiple factor analysis, in which
group factors were identified after extracting a general factor (e.g., Holzinger 1941). Thurstone
(1935) —who founded the Psychometric Society—noted that a vanishing tetrad difference
implied a vanishing second-order determinant of the matrix of observables, and extended this to
the vanishing of higher-order determinants as a condition for more than one factor. He then
generalized the result: the number of common factors is determined by the rank of the matrix of
observables (see Harman 1960). In addition, Thurstone (1935) developed the centroid method of
factoring a correlation matrix (as a pragmatic compromise to the computationally-burdensome
principle axis method). Moreover, he developed a definition of simple structure for factor
analysis based on five principles (the most important of which are to minimize negative loadings
and maximize zero loadings) to facilitate interpretation and insure that loadings were invariant to
the inclusion of other items. This spawned interest in various methods of rotation of the initial
solution, such as Kaiser’s (1958) Varimax orthogonal rotation. Thurstone’s original hand
rotation was oblique, allowing factors to be correlated, but it was Jennrich and Sampson (1966)

4

A third tetrad difference, r12 r34  r13 r24  0, is a function of the first two and will always be true if the first two are

true.

9
who developed a computational method of achieving an oblique rotation and Jennrich and
Clarkson (1980) who worked out the standard errors of rotated loadings (see Browne 2000).
The problem of rotating factor solutions is avoided when confirmatory factor analysis is
used. Here, the number of factors and the pattern of loadings—including restrictions on
loadings—are specified in advance, transforming the problem into one of identification of a
model’s parameters from observed moments—the same issue that arises in simultaneous
equation models.5 The factor model specifies y     , where y is a vector of p observables,

 is a vector of m latent factors, where (m < p),  is a p × m matrix of loadings, and  is a
vector of p error terms representing “unique” variance in y. Identification is typically achieved
by specifying zero-restrictions on elements of  to create, for example, sets of congeneric tests,
in which items load solely on single factors (e.g., Jöreskog 1971a). The zero loadings create
tetrad difference overidentifying restrictions on observed covariances, as noted above. The
covariance structure then becomes:

    
where   E ( y y ') ,   E ( ') , and   E (  ') , and

(5)
0. A maximum likelihood

approach to factor analysis was developed by Lawley (1940), and fully elaborated by Anderson
and Rubin (1956). But, according to Browne (2000:663), computational procedures were not
available until “nested algorithms involving eigenvalues and eigenvectors and imposing
inequality constraints on unique variance estimates were discovered independently by Jöreskog
(1967) and by Jennrich and Robinson (1969).” If S, the covariance matrix of observables
follows a Wishart distribution, the log-likelihood function of the model is

5

Anderson (1991) notes that economists like to put restrictions on models, whereas psychologists refused to do so
until “Jöreskog (1969) came up with the catchy terms ‘exploratory’ and ‘confirmatory factor analysis’” with zerorestrictions on loading matrices, along with computer programs for maximum likelihood estimation. Jöreskog
certainly popularized the terms, but the distinction was originally due to Tucker (1955).

10
1
log L   n  log   tr  S  1   .
2

(6)

Jöreskog (1967) and his colleagues developed computer software programs for confirmatory
factor analysis estimated by maximum likelihood.
Simultaneous Equation and Errors-in-Variables Models in Economics
The structural equation approach in econometrics is usually attributed to Haavelmo (1943) and
the Cowles Commission (1952), most notably Koopmans (1945). But, as Morgan (1990) points
out, Frisch and Waugh (1933: 389-390) were first to define “structural relation” as a “theoretical
relation postulated a priori” in a single equation multivariate linear model in which the partial
regression coefficient represented a “structural coefficient”: “An empirically determined relation
is ‘true’ if it approximates fairly well a certain well-defined theoretical relationship, assumed to
represent the nature of the phenomenon studied.”
Frisch (1934), however, was critical of the use of probability models for economic data
(such as variations in the business cycle), which were rarely the result of a sampling process, and
of OLS regression because measurement errors existed not only on dependent variables, but
independent variables as well. This led him to confluence analysis, which treated observed
variables as fallible indicators of latent variables, and then examined the interrelationships
among all latent and observed variables to distinguish “true relations” from “confluent relations.”
Frisch (1934) developed the method of bunch maps—a graphical presentation of regression
coefficients—as a tool to discover underlying structure, often obtaining approximate bounds for
relationships (for details, see Hendry and Morgan 1989).
According to Qin (1989), Frisch—who coined the term “econometrics” and helped found
the Econometric Society and its journal Econometrica—had developed many of the abstract
principles of identification of simultaneous equation models—although in a manner confounded

11
with issues of estimation and testing—particularly in his critique of Tinbergen (1939).
Tinbergen himself had discussed a formal way of identifying a two-equation model from
reduced-form parameters (Tinbergen 1930 cited in Magnus and Morgan 1987), although in his
monumental models of the Dutch and U.S. economies, he “cleverly constructed his model in the
causal chain fashion,” using OLS to estimate its parameters, including effects of lagged
dependent variables (Anderson 1991).6 In his classic works on demand, Schultz (1938) had
developed the cobweb model in which lagged price identified the supply-demand model.
Remarkably, Schultz was unaware of Sewell Wright’s more general instrumental variable
solution to the identification problem despite the two participating in intellectual discussions of
science, mathematics, and statistics within a hiking group of academics (Goldberger 1972a:98586).
Within this context, Haavelmo (1943, 1944) made two key contributions to structural
equation models in economics. First, he built on the work of Wald, Koopmans (1937) and others
in specifying a probability model for econometric models, presenting clearly and concisely the
Neyman-Pearson (e.g., Neyman and Pearson 1933) approach to hypothesis testing, and using the
probability approach for estimation, testing, and forecasting (see Morgan 1990). He also
distinguished between two models of the source of stochastic components: errors-in-variables
models emphasized by Frisch (1934), and random shocks models introduced by Slutsky (1937). 7
This framework is often referred to as the “probabilistic revolution” in econometrics (see
Morgan 1990) and has had a lasting impact on the field, particularly in cementing the NeymanPearson approach to inference over others, such as Bayesian approaches (e.g., Jeffreys 1935)
6

This recursive causal chain model was later formalized and extended by Wold (1964), who criticized simultaneous
equation models for ignoring the presumption that causality proceeds through time and is best modeled by recursive
causal chains.
7
Koopmans (1937) appears to be the first to argue that residual variance in structural models was due not solely to
measurement error—which implies deterministic relationships in the absence of such errors—but also due to
omitting numerous minor variables from the model (see Epstein 1987:55).

12
(see Heckman 1992). Second, Haavelmo made major advances in simultaneous equation
models, showing that OLS estimates are biased in a two-equation supply-demand model, and
distinguishing between structural form equations and what Mann and Wald (1943) termed the
reduced-form equation. He applied maximum likelihood estimation to the system of equations,
showing its equivalence to OLS when applied to the reduced form, and specifying necessary and
sufficient conditions for identification in terms of partial derivatives of the likelihood function
(Haavelmo 1943, 1944). Haavelmo (1944) also refined the term, “autonomy”: parameters
representing relatively autonomous relations are more likely to be stable, intelligible, and useful
for policy analysis (Aldrich 1989). Parameters, then, are structural when they represent
autonomous relations, which are invariant to policy interventions. Haavelmo (1943) also
interpreted structural equations in terms of counterfactuals or potential outcomes, presaging the
more recent models of Rubin (1974) and Imbens and Angrist (1994).
The advances made by Haavelmo and Mann and Wald led to work on the simultaneous
equation model at the Cowles Commission, which moved to Chicago in 1939, led by Marschak,
and including Koopmans, Haavelmo, Wald, Lurwicz, Klein, and Anderson (Rubin and Leipnik
were graduate assistants in Mathematics, and Simon joined later). Work at the Cowles
Commission solved the major problems of identification, estimation, and testing of simultaneous
equation models. In particular, Koopmans et al. (1950) gave a general treatment of the model’s
structural and reduced forms:
 y  x  u

(7)

13
where y is a vector of p endogenous variables, x is a vector of q predetermined or exogenous
variables, u is a vector of p disturbances (assumed normally-distributed), and  and  are
coefficient matrices in which  is non-singular.8 The reduced form is
y  x  v

(8)

where    , u  v,    ' , and  is the covariance matrix of v.
Anderson (1991) summarizes an intuitive way of stating the identification problem.
Suppose that in (7) some elements of  and  are constrained to be zero. If we rearrange the
matrices so that the first row of (  ,  ) is written as (  , 0,  , 0) , then the first row of   
becomes (  , 0)  ( , 0) . Then partition  :

12 

   11

  21  22 

(9)

 12  0.

(10)

and we obtain  11   , and

The vector  is identified (except for a multiplicative constant) by (10) if and only if the rank of
12 is at least one less than the number of elements in  (Anderson 1991:7). If an equation does
not satisfy this condition, it is under-identified and cannot be estimated. If an equation’s
restrictions on  are exactly one fewer than the rank of 12 , then the equation is just-identified;
if the restrictions are more than one fewer than the rank of 12 , the equation is over-identified.9
Koopmans et al. (1950) also specified a maximum-likelihood estimator for the general

8

For a discussion of the concept of exogeneity, and of super-exogeneity, see Engle, et al. 1993.
While at Cowles, Rubin had been attending lectures by Thurstone and raised the factor model in the context of
identification. Anderson and Rubin (1956) concluded that the identification problems of simultaneous equation and
factor analysis models were identical, which led to their treatise on maximum likelihood factor analysis (see
Anderson 1991).
9

14
simultaneous equations model, which made Haavelmo’s model accessible for empirical
research.10
Perhaps the most important empirical applications of simultaneous equation models were
Klein’s (1950) Keynesian models, culminating with the 15-equation Klein-Goldberger model
estimated by limited-information methods (Klein and Goldberger 1955). Others at Cowles had
worried about the finite sample properties of estimation and introduced limited information
methods as a solution (e.g., Anderson and Rubin 1949).11 Later, Theil (1953) developed a twostage least squares estimator (2SLS), which is consistent but asymptotically efficient only among
single-equation estimators. He applied OLS to the reduced form, obtained predicted values for
endogenous predictors, and applied OLS to the structural form having replaced endogenous
predictors with their predicted counterparts. Zellner (1962) developed a joint generalized least
squares (GLS) approach to seemingly-unrelated regressions, which incorporates information on
covariances among errors of equations that are otherwise unrelated. He showed that GLS
estimates and standard errors are minimum variance for linear models, and gain efficiency over
OLS when the xs differ across equations and covariances among errors of equations are nonzero. Zellner and Theil (1962) developed a three-stage least squares (3SLS) estimator, which
applies joint GLS to the 2SLS estimates—using information from the disturbance covariances—
and showed that, for properly-specified models, 3SLS is consistent, asymptotically efficient, and
asymptotically equivalent to full-information maximum-likelihood.
From its heyday in the 1950s and 1960s, in which Keynesian macro-economic models
proliferated, interest in simultaneous equation models in economics declined (Epstein 1987).
This appears traceable to three events: (1) self-criticism by members of Cowles; (2) Lucas’
10

For excellent discussions of the history of simultaneous equation models in economics, see Epstein (1987) and
especially Morgan (1990).
11
For examples of recent returns to limited information methods to obtain estimates more robust to specification
errors, see Bollen (1996) and Bollen et al. 2007).

15
(1976) rational expectations critique, in which economic agents anticipate policy interventions,
and then act contrary to linear models—implying that models omitting expectations are
misspecified and structural parameters are not policy-invariant; and (3) empirical research
suggesting that macro-Keynsian simultaneous equations models were not superior to simple
naïve models in forecasting the future (e.g., Nelson 1972), leading to alternative time-series
models, such as vector autoregressions (Sims 1980) (see Heckman 2000; Epstein 1987).
The emphasis of Haavelmo and the Cowles Commission on models of errors in equations
led most econometricians to abandon the errors-in-variables model emphasized by Frisch (1934).
Two “path-breaking articles”—Zellner (1970) and Goldberger (1972b)—revived empirical
interest in errors-in variables models (Judge et al. 1980). Zellner (1970) presented GLS (a
modification of his joint GLS estimator) and Bayesian approaches to estimating a model with a
fallible endogenous predictor with multiple causes. Goldberger (1972b) showed that GLS is
equivalent to ML only when errors are normally distributed with known variances. He also
showed that when error variances are unknown, an iterated GLS will converge to ML.12
INTERDISCIPLINARY INTEGRATION
Nineteen-seventy was a watershed year for structural equation modeling: Jöreskog (1970)
published his general method of analyzing covariance structures, Hauser and Goldberger (1971)
presented, at the sociology meetings, their work on unobservables in path analysis, and Zellner
(1970) published his GLS results on unobservable independent variables. The year 1970 was
also marked by the Conference on Structural Equation Models, an interdisciplinary forum—
featuring economists, sociologists, psychologists, statisticians, and political scientists—
originating from a Social Science Research Council recommendation and culminating with a
published volume, Structural Equation Models in the Social Sciences (Goldberger and Duncan
12

For a lucid discussion of various ways that econometricians have approached measurement error, see Judge et al.
(1980), chapter 13.

16
1973). This was presaged by the appearance of Blalock’s (1969) edited volume, Causal Models
in the Social Sciences, which featured interdisciplinary contributions.
In this section, I will focus on two key papers published in this period: Hauser and
Goldberger (1971) and Jöreskog (1973). Hauser and Goldberger’s (1971) examination of
unobservable variables is an exemplar of cross-disciplinary integration, drawing on path analysis
and moment estimators from Wright and sociologists, factor-analytic models from
psychometrics, and efficient estimation and Neyman-Pearson hypothesis testing from statistics
and econometrics. In a seminal and landmark paper that summarized his approach, Jöreskog
(1973) presented his maximum likelihood framework for estimating SEMs, developed a
computer program for empirical applications, and showed how the general model could be
applied to a myriad of important substantive models. Here, I will focus on Hauser and
Goldberger (1971) because it used limited information estimation to reveal what was going on
“behind the scenes” of systems of structural equations estimated by maximum likelihood.
Hauser and Goldberger (1971) analyze two models: the two-factor multiple indicator
“walking dog” model (considered in factor analysis and by Costner and Blalock) and the
multiple-indicator, multiple-indicator cause (MIMIC) model.13 Figure 2 presents a simple
walking dog model with four observables and two latent factors. We can express the model in
matrix form:

 y1   11 0 
 1 
  
 

0   1    2 
 y2    1

 y3   0 32   2    3 
  
 

1 
 y4   0
4 
  

y 

13

(11)

The term, “walking dog model,” originated with Beverly Duncan, who noted that the path diagram (see Figure 1)
resembled a walking dog, in which here depicted the dog’s face and it’s tail (Hauser, personal communication).

17

 1   0 0  1    1 
 
    
2    21 0 2    2 

 
  

(12)

It then follows that the covariance structure model is:

 yy  (  )1 (  )1  

(13)

where  yy  E ( y y ) is the (population) covariance matrix of observable indicators,  is a matrix
of loadings,  is a matrix of regression coefficients among latent variables,  ,   E (  ) is
the covariance matrix of structural disturbances, and   E (  ) is a covariance matrix of
measurement errors (diagonal in this example). This model is overidentified with one degree of
freedom (10 moments and 9 parameters). The overidentifying restriction implies that there is
more than one way of computing parameters in terms of moments and there is a testable
overidentifying restriction in the data. This can be seen by computing moments in terms of
parameters (normal equations) and then solving for parameters in terms of moments. For
example,

32   23  24   13  14 .

(14)

By cross-multiplying the second two terms and rearranging, we obtain the identical tetraddifference restriction as found by Spearman (1927) and given above in equation (4), but in
unstandardized form:  23 14   24 13 . Because (14) can be satisfied by many different models, a
traditional structural equation approach tests a specific nested parameterization of the restriction,
rather than testing the tetrad-difference constraint on moments directly.
In estimating overidentified models, the question becomes which moment estimator(s)
should be used. We can see this by replacing the population moments in (14) with their sample
counterparts, and noting we have two moment estimators for 32 . In overidentified fully-

18
recursive models, the OLS estimator is unbiased and efficient; therefore, using the moment
estimator corresponding to OLS (giving it a weight of one) and ignoring other instrumental
variable moment estimators (giving them a weight of zero), is optimal. In the general case,
however, one would not want to use only one estimator or a simple unweighted average, but
instead weight the moments inversely to their sampling variability. Hauser and Goldberger
(1971) show that this is precisely what maximum likelihood does when minimizing the fit
function in equation in equation (6) above. We can illustrate this point by noting that
minimizing equation (6) is asymptotically equivalent to minimizing a quadratic form (Anderson
1973; Browne 1974):
FGLS  [ s   ( )] W 1 [ s   ( )]

(15)

where s is a vector of non-redundant elements from the sample covariance matrix S,  ( ) is the
corresponding vector of elements of the parametric structure of the covariance matrix  —which
makes s   ( ) a discrepancy vector to be minimized—and W is a weight matrix consisting of
the covariance matrix of the sample moments. Under normality, the latter consists of products of
second-order moments about the mean. Thus, the parameters in  ( ) are expressed as a function
of sample moments s, each of which is weighted inverse to its sampling variability by W. The
estimator in equation (15), termed GLS by Browne (1974), has been applied to econometric
models by Hansen (1982), who terms it the generalized method of moments.
The second model analyzed by Hauser and Goldberger (1971), the MIMIC model, is
presented in a simple four-variable three-equation form in Figure 3. This model has nine
parameters, ten observable moments, and therefore, one overidentifying restriction. In matrix
form, the model is:

19
 y1   11 
 1 
     1    
 y2    21 
2 
y     

 x1 
   1 
 x2 

1    11  12  
 

(16)

(17)

x  



and the covariance structure is:

 yy   (     )   
 xy    

(18)

where  xy  E ( x y ) contains the covariances between x and y,  yy  E ( y y ) the covariances
among the ys,    xx  E ( x x) (covariances among xs are unconstrained),   E (  ) the
covariance matrix of measurement errors in y (assumed diagonal here), and   E (  ) the
covariance matrix of the structural disturbance(s). Let us fix  21  1.0 to normalize the latent
variable  and give it a metric; one could also normalize by fixing  to a constant.
Using path analysis, we can compute moments in terms of parameters, solve for the
parameters, and obtain two ways of expressing parameters in terms of moments. For example,

11   y x  y x   y x  y x .
1 1

2 1

1 2

2 2

(19)

Replacing the population moments with their sample counterparts gives us two sample moment
estimators of 11 . Also, if we cross-multiply the right two terms in (19) we get a single tetraddifference overidentifying restriction,  y1x1 y2 x2   y2 x1 y1x2 . Note that this is the same restriction
on observable moments we found for the walking dog model above (if we denote all variables as
ys), which illustrates an important difficulty for structural equation models: overidentifying
restrictions can be satisfied by substantively different models. In general, maximum likelihood
will provide consistent and asymptotically efficient estimates by weighting sample moments

20
inverse to their sampling variability, resulting in optimal weights for multiple moment
estimators. Again, minimizing the likelihood function will provide a likelihood ratio  2 test of
overidentifying restrictions.
Hauser and Goldberger (1971) also use econometric methods to study identification and
estimation. By substituting (17) into  in (16), we obtain the reduced form:
 y1    11 12  x1     1 

 
   
 y2    21  22  x2     2 
y 
x

 

(20)

where  11  11  11 ,  12  11  12 ,  21  1.0  11 ,  22  1.0  12 ,   1  11  1  1 , and   2  1.0  1   2 .
The reduced form can always be efficiently estimated using OLS. The estimation issue arises
because there are two ways of expressing structural parameters in terms of reduced-form
parameters:

11   11  21   12  22

(21)

This also implies a proportionality constraint on reduced form parameters, providing a test of the
MIMIC specification. Maximum likelihood weights the reduced form parameter estimates ˆ pq
inverse to their sampling variability to obtain asymptotically efficient estimates (Hauser and
Goldberger 1971). In this example, there is one degree of freedom and the single constraint can
be expressed in terms of observed moments or reduced-form parameters. Generally, in more
complex models, both kinds of restrictions exist, and maximum likelihood will use both forms of
restrictions in estimating parameters.14 Jöreskog and Goldberger (1975) later expanded on
maximum likelihood estimation of the MIMIC model and Goldberger (1973) discussed
estimation in overidentified models with latent variables and simultaneity. For discussions of
14

Hauser and Goldberger (1971) also show that in the special case in which all tetrad-difference constraints are
satisfied—such as when measurement errors are mutually correlated—modified GLS (GLS with unknown error
variances) is equivalent to maximum likelihood.

21
indicators as causes of theoretical constructs versus reflections of constructs, see Hauser (1973)
and Bollen and Lennox (1991).
In a series of landmark papers, Jöreskog (1970, 1973, 1978) outlined a general approach to
covariance analysis and a computer program he called LISREL, which, following
econometricians as far back as Frisch and Waugh (1933), stood for “LInear Structural
RELations.” At about the same time, Keesling (1972) in his Ph.D. dissertation, and Wiley
(1973) in the Goldberger-Duncan volume, presented nearly identical models. However, it was
Jöreskog’s version and software package that came to dominate the field. The LISREL model
incorporates factor analysis, simultaneous equation models, and path analysis (as discussed
above) into a general covariance structure model (e.g., Jöreskog and Sörbom 2001)

  yy

  xy

1
1
 yx    y                 y  


1
 xx  
 x       


1
 y       x 

 x  x  


(22)

Jöreskog showed that maximum likelihood estimates are obtained by minimizing the
following fit function and solving for parameters:
FML  log   log S  tr  S  1   p  q

(23)

Where S is the sample estimate of the population covariance matrix,  , and p and q are constants
reflecting the number of observed ys and xs respectively. If we let  be a vector of r parameters,
then the t  t covariance matrix of parameter estimates, V, is a function of the inverse of Fisher’s
information matrix:
2
 2     F 
V    E 

 n        

1

(24)

22
in which the square roots of the diagonal elements are asymptotic standard errors. Finally, if
FH 0 is the minimum of (23) under the null hypothesis, and FH A is the minimum under the less-

restrictive alternative, then -2 times the log likelihood ratio is

  N ( FH  FH )
0

A

(25)

which is asymptotically distributed  2 with  p  q   r degrees of freedom. Equation (25) can be
applied to tests of nested models and the overall goodness-of-fit of the model. Jöreskog (1971b)
also generalized this result to estimate the model in multiple populations, and showed how the
model can be applied to simultaneous equations, MIMIC models, confirmatory factor models,
panel data, simplex models, growth models, variance and covariance components, and factorial
designs (for reviews, see Bielby and Hauser 1977; Bentler 1980, 1986).
In 1975, Duncan authored an excellent introductory text for path analysis and structural
equation models, in which he echoed Frisch and Haavalmo’s concept of autonomy—“The
structural form is that parameterization—among the various possible ones—in which the
coefficients are (relatively) unmixed, invariant, and autonomous” (Duncan 1975:151). He also
distinguished forms of social change, from trivial changes in sampling or exogenous variables
(that leave structural coefficients intact) to deeper changes in structural coefficients (which
provide fodder for explanation by multi-level models), and changes in the model’s structure itself
(167), and provided sage advice for applying structural models (150):
Do not undertake the study of structural equation models (or, for that matter, any other topic
in sociological methods) in the hope of acquiring a technique that can be applied
mechanically to a set of numerical data with the expectation that the result will
automatically be “research.”

23
Furthermore, Duncan noted that if research using structural models “are contributions to science
(and not merely exercises in quantitative technique), it is because the models rest on creative,
substantial, and sound sociological theory” (p. 151).
The next two decades saw an explosion of the use of structural equation models in many
areas of the social sciences, including stratification (e.g., Bielby, Hauser, and Featherman 1977),
social psychology (e.g., Kohn and Schooler 1982), psychology (e.g., Bentler and Speckart 1981),
marketing (Bagozzi 1980), mental health (e.g., Wheaton 1978, 1985), sociology of science (e.g.,
Hargens, Reskin, and Allison 1976), criminology (e.g., Matsueda 1982; Matsueda and Heimer
1987), adolescence (e.g., Simmons and Blyth 1987), and population genetics (e.g., Li 1975).
Some extensions of the model were developed during this period. Alwin and Hauser (1975)
wrote a systematic treatment of decomposing effects into total, direct, and indirect effects using
path analysis. Sobel (1982, 1986) applied the delta method to obtain asymptotic standard errors
for total and indirect effects, Bollen (1987) developed a method for determining specific effects
and their standard errors (implemented in Mplus), and Bollen and Stein (1990) developed
bootstrap confidence intervals for indirect effects. Kenny and Judd (1984) showed how to
estimate a LISREL model with product terms among latent exogenous variables, and Jöreskog
and Yang (1996) showed that Browne’s ADF estimator used on the matrix of augmented
moments provides consistent estimates of parameters in the Kenny-Judd model as well as
consistent standard errors and fit statistics.
Matsueda and Bielby (1986) and Satorra and Saris (1985) independently showed how to
calculate the power of the likelihood ratio test in covariance structure models—using the noncentral  2 distribution—and independently presented a nearly identical way of approximating
the non-centrality parameter. They showed that the likelihood ratio test statistic is
asymptotically equivalent to a quadratic form:

24







  ˆr   r 0 'Vr1 ˆr   r 0



(26)

where ˆr is the ML estimator for the rth parameter  r 0 is the corresponding null hypothesis, and
Vr is the asymptotic covariance matrix of ˆr , or in other words, r-dimensional submatrix of

(24). Under the null hypothesis,  has a central  2 distribution with r degrees of freedom.
Under the alternative hypothesis, has a non-central  2 distribution with r degrees of freedom
and non-centrality parameter:

   r   r 0  'Vr1  r   r 0 

(27)

where  r is the population parameter corresponding to the alternative hypothesis and  r 0 is the
population parameter corresponding to the null hypothesis (see Kendall and Stuart 1979:246-7).
Matsueda and Bielby (1986) then drew on Hauser and Goldberger (1971) and Goldberger (1973)
to show analytically that, in a walking dog model (Figure 2), adding indicators to the endogenous
latent variable increases the power of the test of  21 , depending on the reliability of the
indicators. This is analogous to adding cross-sections to a pooled time-series cross-section
econometric model estimated by GLS. They also gave simulation results for adding indicators to
the exogenous latent variable (see Matsueda and Bielby 1986; Satorra and Saris 1985).
Applied researchers obsessed over the global goodness of fit likelihood ratio  2 test because
in large samples, models with many overidentifying restrictions tend to be rejected even when
each restriction only departs trivially from the null hypothesis. This gave rise to a cottage
industry of fit indices designed to offset the effect of sample size on test statistics. From this
literature, it seems that a consensus is emerging that the most useful fit indices are Steiger and
Lind’s (1980) root mean squared error of approximation (RMSEA) (see also Steiger 1990;
Browne and Cudeck 1993) and Raftery’s (1993, 1995) application of Schwartz’s (1978)

25
Bayesian information criterion (BIC). (For details, see West et al., this volume). RMSEA is
defined as

  F0 r

(28)

where F0 is the population discrepancy function reflecting the model’s lack of fit, r is the
degrees of freedom, as above. MacCallum, Browne, and Sugawara (1996) have defined the
noncentrality parameter for RMSEA index:

  (n  1)r 2

(29)

where n is the sample size. They show that power can be calculated for the null hypothesis of
perfect fit (i.e.,   0 ) as well as an approximate or close fit (e.g.,   .05 ). The latter may be
useful in very large samples for models with many overidentifying restrictions, whereby
reasonably well-specified models are likely to be rejected (see Le, Cai, and MacCallum, this
volume). To date, RMSEA is the most popular fit index used in empirical applications of SEM,
although it has been recently subject to criticism (e.g., Chen et al. 2008 on using a fixed cutoff
point).
ADDRESSING VIOLATIONS OF DISTRIBUTIONAL ASSUMPTIONS

At this time, a major criticism of structural equation models argued that the assumptions of
continuous observed variables, multivariate normal distributions, and large sample sizes—
needed to capitalize on the asymptotic properties of maximum likelihood estimation and
testing—were rarely met in practice. Some early Monte Carlo studies, such as Boomsma (1983),
which created non-normal errors by categorizing continuous variables, found that estimators
were robust when samples were greater than 200, but that skewness due to categorization

26
produced spurious measurement error correlations, and biased standardized coefficients (see
Bollen 1989 for a review).15
Asymptotic Distribution-Free Estimator
As noted above, Browne (1974) introduced the quadratic form estimator he termed generalized
least squares, which yielded optimal estimates for normally-distributed observable variables
when W is the covariance matrix of the sample moments, (see equation 15). Subsequently,
Browne (1984) made a landmark contribution by developing what he termed an “asymptotic
distribution-free” (ADF) estimator, by incorporating information about higher-order moments
into the weight matrix of equation (15), which can be written in scalar form as
k

g

k

i

FGLS   w gh , ij  sgh   gh     sij   ij   

(30)

g 1 h 1 i 1 j 1

where sgh is the sample covariance between variables g and h,  gh   is the corresponding
element of    implied by the model, and w gh , ij is a typical element of W 1 , which is u  u ,
where u = k (k + 1), and k is the number of observables. Browne (1984) showed that if W is a
matrix with typical element
wgh , ij  mghij  s gh sij

(31)

where mghij is the fourth-order moment about the mean, then minimizing equation (15) yields the
ADF estimator, which is minimum variance consistent within the class of estimators in the form
of (15) under the mild assumption that eighth-order moments are finite (Browne 1984:710).16
Browne (1984) presented the asymptotic covariance matrix for ˆADF and an asymptotic  2 test

15

Wold’s (1982) partial least squares “soft modeling” approach to causal chain models provides “instant” estimates
under arbitrary distributions, but which do not necessarily have desirable statistical properties.
16
x  E x   x  E  x j 
Note that mghij 1 n  xg  xg  xh  xh  xi  xi  x j  x j  is a sample estimator of  ghij 1 n   xg  E  xg   xh  E  xh 

 i  i    j








27
statistic, as well as an estimator for elliptical distributions, which have zero skewness but
kurtosis that departs from multivariate normality.
Browne’s (1984) ADF and elliptical estimators first appeared in Bentler’s (1995) EQS
program, followed by Jöreskog and Sörbom’s LISREL program. Recent work has examined the
finite sample properties of ADF, finding that it works well in very large samples. Other
techniques available are using corrections to covariance matrix of ML estimators to obtain
accurate p-values for the

	test under non-normality (e.g., Browne 1984), or a bootstrap method

(Bollen and Stine 1993). Browne’s ADF estimator was also crucial for a second important
advance: developing models for ordinal, limited, and discrete outcomes.
Models for Ordinal, Limited, and Discrete Outcomes
Structural equation models are often applied to survey data, in which items are measured on
dichotomous or ordinal scales, violating the assumption of continuous and normally-distributed
observed variables. Muthén (1984) has made seminal contributions for analyzing dichotomous,
ordinal, and limited dependent variables within a covariance structure framework. The trick is to
estimate scale-appropriate correlation coefficients (e.g., polychoric and polyserial) and then use a
variation of Browne’s (1984) ADF estimator. The polychoric correlation, which goes back to
Pearson (1901b), computes a correlation under the assumption that the ordered categories can be
represented by contiguous intervals on a continuous scale (correlations between ordinal and
continuous variables are termed polyserial correlations).17 Thus, the ordinal variable is related to
the underlying normally-distributed continuous latent variable through a threshold model. Early
work on factor models for dichotomous variables include Bock and Lieberman (1970) who used
tetrachoric correlations and an ML estimator for a single factor model, and Christofferson (1975)

17

Pearson’s tetrachoric correlation, involving pairs of dichotomous variables, led to his famous quarrel with Yule
(1912), who argued that many binary outcomes, such as death, cannot be viewed as reflections of a continuous scale,
and proposed his Q-coefficient instead (see Pearson and Heron 1913).

28
who generalized this to multiple factors using a GLS estimator (see also Muthén 1978). Muthén
(1979) developed a multiple-indicator structural probit model and Winship and Mare (1983,
1984) applied multivariate probit models estimated by ML to multiple-indicator structural
equation models and path analysis.
Muthén (1984) provided a general framework for analyzing ordinal variables. Here I will
focus on the polychoric and ADF approach with a simple example of a pair of three-category
ordinal variables. Each ordered variable is related to an underlying continuous variable by two
thresholds:
y  1 if y*  1
y  2 if 1  y*   2

(32)

y  3 if  2  y*

where the value for y indexes the ordinal category for y, y* is a latent continuous variable, and α1
and α2 are thresholds. If we specify a distribution for y* —we will assume it is normal—we can
then estimate the thresholds by the general formula:
i

 i   1  nk N

i  1, 2,3 k  1, 2

(33)

k 1

where i indexes the category of y, k indexes the number of thresholds,  1 ( . ) is the inverse of
the standard normal distribution function, nk is the sample size of the kth category, and N is the
total sample size and N = n1 + n2 + …+ nk. If we apply the above to a second three-category
ordered variable x, but with thresholds β1 and β2, and define πij as the population parameter
denoting that an observation falls into cell (i, j), we can then define the log-likelihood function of
the sample (Olsson 1979):
3

3

log L(nij |  ij )  c nij log  ij
i 1 j 1

(34)

29
where  ij   2  i ,  j    2  i 1 ,  j    2  i ,  j 1    2  i 1 ,  j 1  , and  2 ( , ) is the bivariate
normal distribution function with population correlation  . Maximizing (34) will yield the ML
estimator of the polychoric correlation, ˆ ML . Alternatively, one can use a two-step procedure,
estimating the thresholds αi and βj from the marginals of the contingency table (e.g., 33), and
then solving for  . See Olsson (1979) for a parallel treatment of the polyserial correlation
between continuous and ordered variables, and Poon and Lee (1987) for multivariate ML
estimators of both polychoric and polyserial correlations.
Once the polychoric and polyserial correlations ˆ and their asymptotic covariances have
been estimated, Browne’s (1984) ADF fitting function can be used to obtain optimal estimates:
1
FADF   ˆ      S 
 ˆ     

(35)

where ˆ is a vector of scale-appropriate correlation estimates,    is the corresponding vector
1
is the inverse of the asymptotic
of the parametric structure generating the correlations, and S 

covariance matrix of the correlation estimates. Standard errors and  2 test statistics are obtained
as above (Muthén 1984). Muthén (1989) has also developed a tobit factor analysis for censored
observed variables. A general method for handling dichotomous and limited dependent variables
in SEM was initially programmed in Muthén’s LISCOMP program, and then in his recent more
comprehensive Mplus program (Muthén and Muthén 2004), and later in Jöreskog and Sörbom’s
(2002, 2001) PRELIS and LISREL programs, and Bentler’s (1995) EQS. Much of this material
is covered in Bollen’s (1989) excellent intermediate-level SEM text.
RECENT ADVANCES: DISCOVERY, CAUSALITY, GENERALIZED MULTILEVEL
LINEAR MODELS, AND BAYESIAN INFERENCE

30
Major contemporary advances in structural equation modeling make it an exciting and growing
field. These include the development of latent growth and latent class growth models for
longitudinal data, the application of Bayesian methods, the integration of generalized linear
models and multi-level models within an SEM framework, the adoption of algorithms from
artificial intelligence to discover causal structure, and a formal treatment of causality within an
SEM framework.
Latent Growth and Latent Class Growth Models
Although the use of factor analysis for modeling panel data on growth was introduced by Tucker
(1958) and Rao (1958), it was not until 1990 that Meredith and Tisak (1990) published the
treatment within an SEM framework that is still relevant today (see Bollen and Curran 2006).
Meredith and Tisak showed that individual growth curves, often modeled within a multi-level or
mixed model framework (e.g. Raudenbush and Bryk 2002), can be modeled within a standard
SEM framework by treating the shape of growth curves as latent variables with multiple
indicators consisting of the variable at multiple time points. This latent growth curve approach
models both covariances and means of observed variables. Figure 4 presents a path diagram of a
four-wave quadratic latent growth curve model. Here, the intercept, α, gives the value of y
implied by the model at the first time point, β1 is the linear growth component (giving the growth
rate at the first time point), and β2 is the quadratic growth component (giving the change in the
growth rate over time). One can then impose a parametric structure on the growth parameters, α,
β1, and β2, which would correspond to the second-level equation in a multi-level model.
In criminology, Nagin and Land (1993) developed a finite mixture model for latent classes
of individual trajectories. This group-based trajectory model estimates individual trajectories
using polynomials and then classifies the trajectories into discrete groups. The latent classes can
be viewed as points of support in approximating a continuous distribution of unobserved

31
heterogeneity or as reflections of theoretically important groups (see Nagin 2005). In
criminology, this model has been used to distinguish criminal careers, such as chronic offenders,
early starters, and adolescence-limited offenders (see Nagin and Tremblay 2005). Muthén
(2004) shows how to estimate this model within an SEM framework with Mplus. Moreover,
Muthén’s approach, termed growth mixture modeling, allows for within-class variation among
individual trajectories—a mean curve with variation around it— whereas Nagin’s approach does
not. The latter is nested within the former and can be subjected to statistical test. These models
have become important features of research in child development, adolescent substance abuse,
and criminal careers (e.g., Nagin and Tremblay 2005; Connell and Frye 2006).
Bayesian Approaches
As noted above, work at the Cowles Commission helped cement the Neyman-Pearson frequentist
approach to hypothesis testing in econometric simultaneous equation models, which spread to
SEM in psychology through Anderson and Jöreskog, and in sociology through Goldberger and
Duncan. In recent years, alternatives—particularly Bayesian approaches—have been proposed
for SEM (for an early and persistent advocate in economics, see Zellner 1971). From a Bayesian
perspective, estimation is less about deducing the values of population parameters and more
about updating, sharpening, and refining our beliefs about the empirical world.
Bayesian estimation begins with a probability model of the data D in terms of a vector of
parameters θ (e.g., Raftery 1995). The analyst’s prior beliefs about the uncertainty of θ is
denoted by the prior probability density, p(θ). The probability model for the data, then, is the
likelihood function, p(D| θ), which is the probability of the data given that θ are the true
parameters. We then observe the data D and update our beliefs about θ using Bayes’ theorem:

p( | D)   p( D |  ) p( ) p( D)

(36)

32
The data are treated as a fixed set of information to be used in updating our beliefs about the
parameters. Therefore, p(D) does not involve θ, and equation (36) reduces to
p ( | D )  p ( D |  ) p ( )

(37)

where  means “proportional to.” The marginal density of the data has been dropped; to make
this a proper density, a proportionality constant can be added. Thus, the posterior density is
proportional to the likelihood times the prior density. Inferences about θ are made from
summary statistics about the posterior density, p ( | D ) , such as the posterior mode or Bayesian
confidence intervals (“credible intervals”), which have an intuitive interpretation: “the
probability that the true value of the parameter lies in the interval is—for example—95%.”
Bayesian hypothesis testing entails comparing hypotheses to determine which has the
highest probability of being correct. Suppose we have two hypotheses, H0 and H1, with prior
probabilities, p  H 0  and p  H1  before the data are examined, and define the prior odds ratio as

Odds prior  p  H 0  p  H1 

(38)

After examining the data, the prior probability will be updated, resulting in posterior
probabilities for each hypothesis, p  H 0 | D  and p  H1 | D  , and a posterior odds ratio:

p  H 0 | D  p  H1 | D   Odds posterior  B01  Odds prior

(39)

where B01 is the Bayes factor:

B01  p  D | H 0  p  D | H1 
and p  D | H 0  and p  D | H1  are the marginal probabilities of the data. Equation (39), the
posterior odds ratio, gives the probability that the data support H0 over H1. Note that the
posterior odds are equal to the Bayes factor when the prior odds are equal to 1.

(40)

33
Bayesian estimation and testing is currently diffusing into the SEM literature. For example,
Raftery (1993, 1995) showed how to approximate the Bayes factor with the Bayesian
Information Criterion (BIC), which is computed from the likelihood-ratio test statistic. Suppose
we wish to compare two models in which Mk-1 is nested within Mk and has one more parameter
than Mk. Then, if  k 1 is the likelihood ratio test statistic for model Mk-1 and  k is that of model
Mk and    k 1  k is the test statistic for testing the one parameter (see equation 25), then
BICk 1  BICk    log n

(41)

where n is the sample size. If this quantity is positive, then the less-restrictive model Mk is
preferred (Raftery 1995). As a fit statistic, BIC has performed exceedingly well in a variety of
contexts and is particularly useful for SEM in large samples and with many overidentifying
restrictions because trivially small departures from a reasonable model will be rejected using the
likelihood ratio test. Although it has become the dominant fit statistic for most models estimated
by maximum likelihood, it has only recently begun to be used in SEM empirical studies.
Bayesian estimation using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms are proving
useful for incorporating prior information into confirmatory factor analysis (e.g., Lee 1981),
estimating complex models, such as nonlinear latent variable models (e.g., Arminger and Muthén
1998), estimating multilevel factor models (Goldstein and Browne 2002), arriving at a
semiparametric estimator (Yang and Dunson 2010), and drawing inferences about
underidentified parameters from the posterior distribution when an informative prior is used
(Scheines, Hoijtink, and Boomsma 1999). For details, see Kaplan and Depaoli, this volume.
The program, Tetrad III, provides an MCMC algorithm using the Gibbs sampler (Scheines, et al.
1997).
Generalized Linear Latent and Mixed Models

34
When data take on a hierarchical structure—such as individuals nested within families, which are
in turn, nested within neighborhoods—special methods are needed to obtain consistent estimates
of standard errors and test statistics due to dependent observations within clusters. Multi-level
regression models allow estimation of models in which random intercepts capture heterogeneity
between clusters in the dependent variable and random coefficients capture heterogeneity in
relationships among independent and dependent variables. A multi-level structural equation
model would incorporate multiple-indicator measurement models into the latent variable models.
Early attempts to incorporate measurement error into multilevel regression models have assumed
that measurement error variances (e.g., Goldstein 1995) or factor loadings (e.g., Raudenbush and
Sampson 1999) are known and have the advantage that unbalanced designs, in which the number
of level-1 cases varies by level-2, are easily handled if missing at random (see Rabe-Hesketh et
al. 2004).
Multi-level structural equation models have typically specified separate models for withincluster and between-cluster covariances matrices. For example, Muthén (1994) has shown how
to estimate a two-level SEM using available SEM software. The trick is to specify separate
within- and between-cluster models, and then use the multiple group option to estimate the
parameters simultaneously. Muthén (1994) argues that an estimator using this method is
equivalent to maximum likelihood in balanced designs, and is consistent (with reasonable
standard errors and test statistics) in unbalanced designs (see also Goldstein and McDonald
1988; Muthén 1997). (For a review of alternate estimators, see Yuan and Bentler 2007). This
approach is easily implemented using existing SEM software, but is limited to specific models.
A more general approach is outlined in Rabe-Hesketh et al. (2004), and expanded upon in
Skrondal and Rabe-Hesketh’s (2004) excellent advanced text. Their generalized linear latent and
mixed modeling (GLLAMM) framework consists of three components: (1) a response model;

35
(2) a structural equation model for latent variables; and (3) distributional assumptions for latent
variables. The response model is simply a generalized linear model conditional on the latent
variables, and consisting of a linear predictor, a link function, and a distribution from the
exponential family (Rabe-Hesketh et al. 2004). The model can handle response variables that are
continuous, ordinal, dichotomous, discrete and continuous time durations, counts, polytomous
responses and rankings, and mixes of responses. The structural equation for latent variables takes
on the usual form,        , with the exception that latent variables are allowed to vary
by different levels. Rabe-Hesketh et al. (2004) assume the latent variables at level l are
distributed multivariate normal with zero mean and covariance matrix  l , although other
distributions can be specified. The authors have also written a program, GLLAMM, which
maximizes the marginal likelihood using an adaptive quadrature procedure, and is available in
the software package, Stata (Rabe-Hesketh et al. 2001). For more details, see Skorndal and
Rabe-Hesketh (2004) and Rabe-Hesketh et al. in this volume. Many of these models can also be
estimated using Mplus (Muthén and Muthén 2004).
Tetrad: The Discovery of Causal Structure
A philosophically distinct approach to SEM developed with the publication of Glymour et al.’s
(1987) Discovering Causal Structure: Artificial Intelligence, Philosophy of Science, and
Statistical Modeling. Instead of focusing on estimation and testing of structural models specified
on a priori grounds, Glymour et al. (1987) draw on computer algorithms from artificial
intelligence to “discover” causal structure with their program, TETRAD. Thus, they are
returning to the earlier ideas of Spearman, Frisch, Simon, Blalock, and Costner, who tried, in
various ways, to induce causal structure from patterns of association among variables.18 As we

18

A feature of Wold’s (1982) soft modeling approach is the further development of a model through a “dialogue
between the investigator and the computer.”

36
noted above, Spearman’s focus on tetrad difference restrictions on observed correlations became
superfluous in light of Thurstone’s rotated solution to simple structure for factor models; Frisch’s
confluence analysis and bunch mappings became obsolete with advances in identification and
estimation in simultaneous equations; and Simon and Blalock’s method of ransacking three- and
four-variable models became outdated with the development of estimation and testing using ML
and GLS in integrated SEMs. These “outdated” approaches have been resurrected by Glymour
et al. (1987).
Beginning with the observation that an infinite number of models are consistent with any
covariance matrix of observed variables, Glymour et al. return to Simon and Blalock’s method of
identifying the vanishing partial correlations that must hold for a given model and to the writings
of Wright, Spearman, and others, who identified the tetrad difference equations that must hold
for a given model. They provide a fascinating philosophy of science edifice to justify the idea of
discovering causal structure. Moreover, they use the terminology of directed graphs—rather
than path analysis—in which variables are vertices, causal effects are directed edges that can be
into a vertex (the number denoted by indegree) and out of a vertex (the number denoted by
outdegree), a recursive model is acyclic, a non-recursive model (in which a path contains a
subpath beginning and ending in the same vertex) is a cyclic model, and a trek is a path or a set
of paths that induce a correlation. Using these notions, they provide basic theorems and
definitions about causal relations and a computer program, TETRAD, for discovering causal
structure. The program allows users to incorporate a priori information about the data—such as
a tentative or partial model—identifies the vanishing tetrad differences and vanishing partial
correlations of the model, and then provides a test of the constraints. It then modifies the model
by identifying the treks needed to satisfy a “false” tetrad equation without altering “true” tetrad
equations, and calculates vanishing tetrads and partial correlations implied by the new model.

37
Bollen (1990) develops a simultaneous test statistic to address the multiple testing problem and
Bollen and Ting (1993) develop a confirmatory tetrad analysis approach for testing SEMs,
including some non-nested and under-identified models.
The Tetrad approach is not without its critics (e.g., Humphreys and Freedman 1996) and
controversies (e.g., Sprites, Glymour and Scheines 1997; Glymour and Cooper 1999). Robins
and Wasserman (1999) have effectively shown that it is not possible, in an observational study,
to infer causal relationships between two variables assuming that the sample is large and the
distribution of the random variables is consistent with the causal graph, and assuming no
additional substantive background knowledge (as claimed in Spirites et al. 1993 and Pearl and
Verma 1991). Using a Bayesian framework, they demonstrate that the claim assumes that the
prior probability of no unmeasured causes is high relative to sample size, and when this
probability is low relative to sample size, causal relationships are underidentified from the data.
This opens a new puzzle: What kinds of assumptions must be made to discover causal
relationships from non-experimental data (Glymour et al. 1999)? This puzzle has encouraged
cross-fertilization from the causality literature in statistics into the SEM literature.
Nevertheless, Tetrad is certainly a useful empirical tool for exploring causal structures,
finding equivalences, and providing an efficient tool for sensitivity analyses. Tetrad has been
shown to be more efficient at modifying models than existing procedures available in SEM
packages, such as using first-order partial derivatives, residuals, or univariate Lagrange
multipliers (termed “modification indexes” in LISREL). Moreover, by introducing the language
of directed graphs into structural equation models, it helps bridge the SEM literature with new
developments in graphical theory and causal analysis (see Spirtes, et al. 1993).
Causality and Structural Equation Models

38
An exciting recent development, which is slowly filtering into the SEM community, has been an
explicit return to causal models using the language and logic of counterfactuals—What would
happen if a subject received a different treatment (or value of the independent variable)?19 As a
consequence of Freedman’s (e.g., 1987) persistent criticisms of SEM applications for making
causal claims when assumptions of linear models are not met, and the more compelling critique
of Holland (1988), most members of the SEM community have retreated from making causal
claims and using causal language.20 However, a recent literature, emerging from disparate
sources, such as statistics, artificial intelligence, philosophy of science, epidemiology, and
economics, has developed graphical models for identifying causality under explicit weaker
assumptions than are generally made. Such models, which generalize and extend Wright’s
(1921a) original path analysis, appeared in the social science literature as early as 1982, but did
not catch on (see Kiiveri and Speed 1982). Since then, major advances have been made in
artificial intelligence (e.g., Pearl 1988), statistics (e.g., Wermuth and Lauritsen 1983; Spirtes et
al. 1993), and epidemiology (Robins 1986; Robins and Greenland 1992; Greenland et al. 1999).
This approach begins with the classical SEM assumption that causality cannot be
determined from observational data alone, but requires additional causal assumptions drawn
from theoretical or substantive knowledge, which are translated into a structural model
represented by a path model. At this point, the approach departs from traditional path analytic
and SEM treatments of causality, in which strong and often unrealistic assumptions must be
made in empirical applications:
Structural equation models do little more to justify the causal interpretation of their
coefficients than the causal orderings of path analysis. In both approaches, such causal
19

The counterfactual approach to causality is just one of many potential approaches. For a critique of the
counterfactual approach in statistics—with a lively discussion from leading statisticians--see Dawid (2000).
20
For a lucid response to Freedman’s (1987) critique of Blau-Duncan, see Glymour et al. (1987), and for a lively
description of Duncan’s personal correspondence with Freedman, see Xie (2007).

39
interpretations are established by fiat rather than by deduction from more basic assumptions
(Holland 1988:460).
The contemporary counterfactual causality literature lays bare the typically strong assumptions
underlying “causality by fiat,” and more importantly, searches for ways of identifying causal
effects under weaker assumptions.
To get a sense of this literature, consider a fundamental issue of causality in SEM—
decomposing total effects into direct and indirect effects (see Figure 5). From a causality
perspective, by manipulating and randomizing values of the independent variable, causal effects
of that variable can be identified because reciprocal causation and omitted variable bias are ruled
out. In the case of indirect effects, this requires sequential randomization (Robins and Greenland
1992). For example, in Model A of Figure 5, by randomizing on X we can obtain the causal
effect of X on M and the total causal effect of X on Y. But, because M is endogenous—and
therefore, neither manipulated nor randomized—we cannot obtain the causal effect of M on Y.
Consequently, we cannot obtain the direct causal effect of X on Y, and cannot decompose the
total causal effect of X into direct and indirect components. To obtain the causal effect of M on Y
we must randomize on M, and hence, the need for sequential randomization.
In the social sciences, however, such sequential randomization is rarely possible, and
therefore, the question becomes, “What assumptions are necessary to identify causal direct and
indirect effects?” An early paper by Holland (1988) discussed the question within Rubin’s (e.g.,
1974) model, which carefully separates causal theory from observed data, and which begins with
unit causal effects based on counterfactuals and then defines average causal effects. Rubin’s
model typically assumes independent outcomes, and in particular, that treatment of one

40
individual does not affect the outcome of another.21 Holland noted that if we can assume that the
effect of X on Y operates solely through its effects on M—that is c = 0, which yields Model B of
Figure 5— then the average causal effect of M on Y is identified and estimable using an
instrumental variable estimator. Since X is orthogonal to u (by randomization) and X has no
direct effect on Y (because c = 0), X can serve as an instrument for M (as long as a ≠ 0) and a
consistent estimator of b, the average causal effect of M on Y, is simply the total average causal
effect of X on Y divided by the direct average causal effect of X on M. This estimator is useful for
encouragement designs—in which it is reasonable to assume that X, randomized encouragement
(such as encouraging students to study), affects Y solely through M, the activity encouraged
(studying)—but is of limited utility in most observational studies in the social sciences (Sobel
2008).
A related approach to the separation of causal direct and indirect effects is associated with
the work of Robins (e.g., Robins and Greenland 1992), which builds on Robins’ (1986) original
graphical approach to causality using tree graphs. Robins and Greenland (1992) show that
Robins’ (1986) g-computation algorithm can be used to separate direct and indirect effects of X
if X and M are both randomized, X and M do not interact, and M can be blocked by intervention
(i.e., manipulated). When these conditions hold, but M is not manipulated, g-estimation can still
estimate the fraction of total effect that could be prevented by blocking M if additional
confounding variables are available. Finally, when all conditions hold, except X and M interact
in affecting Y, direct and indirect effects cannot be separated, although one can still estimate the
fraction of the total effect of X that could be prevented by blocking M.
Recently, Emsley, Dunn, and White (2010) review alternate approaches to estimating
mediating effects in controlled trials and show that under treatment heterogeneity, the interaction
21

Rubin (1980) terms this the “stable unit treatment value assumption” (SUTVA); Heckman (2010) has pointed out
that Hurwicz (1962) included this assumption under the concept of invariance.

41
terms between randomized treatment and exogenous confounders can be used as instrumental
variables to separate direct and indirect effects of treatment when the mediating variable is not
randomized. Sobel (2008) shows that instrumental variables can be used to separate direct and
indirect effects under weaker assumptions—such as relaxing the assumption of constant
treatment effects—than presented by Holland (1988). Jo and Muthén (2002) have used latent
growth models to define principal strata of the mediator and estimating, for models with multiple
outcomes, complier average causal effects (CACE), which are average effects of treatment in the
subpopulation of compliant subjects (e.g., Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996).
In economics, following Imbens and Angrist (1994), CACE is defined as local average
treatment effects (LATE), which has spawned a spate of randomized experiments using
instrumental variables to identify treatment effects (see Imbens and Wooldridge 2009 for a
review). The relative merits of using randomization to identify causal effects versus using
structural models, such as Roy’s (1951) counterfactual model, remain controversial among
economists (Heckman and Urzúa 2010). For an excellent discussion of the relative merits of the
two approaches in economics, including key tradeoffs between internal and external validity, see
Deaton (2010), Imbens (2010), and Heckman (2010).
From artificial intelligence and epidemiology, a graphical model approach to causality has
emerged. This approach represents the causal assumptions by a graphical model and then
logically infers causality from a set of theorems applied to the graph. In addition to Robins’
(1986) tree graph approach, Pearl (2000) develops a “nonparametric structural causal model”
which holds regardless of distributional and other statistical assumptions about a particular
dataset. Causal statements can be made that are conditional on the causal assumptions encoded
into the graphical model.

42
Pearl’s (2000) approach—which is largely consistent with that of Robins’ (1986)—advances
SEM by (1) using new mathematical notation to reflect causality, such as replacing the algebraic
equals sign with a sign that reflects a causal path; (2) deriving a theorem, the “back-door”
criterion to determine which covariates should be controlled to arrive at a causal relationship in
an SEM; (3) deriving a theorem, termed “d-separation” (directed separation), which gives the
necessary and sufficient conditions for independence between two sets of variables conditioned
on a third set within an acyclic directed graph; (4) providing some simple mathematical notation
for making counterfactual statements, which can be analyzed within the directed graph (for an
introduction, see Morgan and Winship 2007); and (5) providing an algorithm for identifying
equivalent models. Taken together, these theorems translate the language of causality into the
language of statistics and probability distributions (for distinctions between the approaches of
Robins and Pearl, see Robins 1995, 2003). For an excellent presentation of the graphical
approach to SEM, see Pearl (2000), and for a lucid introduction to the principles and issues, see
Pearl (this volume).
The importance of a graphical approach can be illustrated with a simple example. Consider
Model A in Figure 6, a bivariate regression model of Y on X, with two latent variables—ξ affects
X and C, and η affects Y and C. Standard SEM texts assume that including an irrelevant variable
in a linear regression model leaves estimates unbiased, but results in a loss of precision in the
estimate (e.g., Greene 2003:150-1). However, when Model A is the correct model, regressing Y
on X and Z—which appears irrelevant—results in biased and inconsistent estimates of β. We can
see this intuitively from Model A; the covariance between Z and X and Z and Y are spurious due
to the latent variables ξ and η. Spirtes et al. (1995:190-1) show that if we simplify Model A to
Model B (Figure 6), and compute parameters in terms of covariances and partial covariances, we
obtain an estimator from regressing Y on X and Z, which is biased and inconsistent:

43
E ( X , Y | Z ) E ( X 2 | Z )   xz yz /  x2 z2   xz2 

(42)

where the term left of the equality sign is the (naïve) two-variable regression coefficient, and

 xz2 is the squared covariance of X and Z. A graphical approach quickly reveals not only that an
unbiased and consistent estimate of β is obtained by the bivariate regression of Y on Z, but also
that a consistent estimator can be obtained by the naïve two-variable regression by also
controlling for ξ , η, or both (Greenland and Brumback 2002).
The recent causality literature suggests that the parameters of most applications of SEM in
the social sciences cannot be interpreted as causal effects without making strong and often
unrealistic assumptions. What, then, are we to make of empirical applications of SEM, such as
status attainment models? Perhaps a prudent interpretation, consistent with O.D. Duncan’s
thinking near the end of his career, is that such models “summarize systematic patterns in
population variability” (Xie 2007:157), or perhaps more precisely, describe “the probabilistic
relationship between successive events in a population of interest” (Sobel 1992:666). Such a
description—even in the absence of causal language—is a crucial feature of social science
research.
CONCLUSION

Structural equation modeling has progressed through four general stages: (1) early disciplinaryspecific developments of path analysis from genetics and later sociology, factor analysis from
psychology, and simultaneous-equation models in economics; (2) cross-disciplinary fertilization
between economics, sociology, and psychology leading to an explosion of empirical applications
of SEM; (3) a period of developing methods for handling discrete, ordinal, and limited dependent
variables; and (4) a recent period of incorporating statistical advances into the SEM framework,
including generalized linear models, mixed effects models, mixture regression models, Bayesian
methods, graphical models, and methods for identifying causal effects. The recent period is

44
substantially integrating SEM with the broader statistical literature, which—as the chapters of
this volume demonstrate—is making SEM an evermore exciting and vibrant tool for the social
sciences.

45
REFERENCES
Aldrich, John. 1989. “Autonomy.” Oxford Economic Papers 41:15-34.
Alwin, Duane F. and Robert M. Hauser. 1975. "The Decomposition of Effects in Path Analysis.”
American Sociological Review 40:37-47.
Anderson, T.W. 1973. “Asymptotically Efficient Estimation of Covariance Matrices with Linear
Structure.” Annals of Statistics 1:135-41.
_______1991. “Trygve Haavelmo and Simultaneous Equation Models.” Scandanavian Journal of
Statistics 18:1-19.
Anderson, T.W., and Herman Rubin.1949. “Estimation of the Parameters of a Single Equation in a
Complete System of Stochastic Equations.” Annals of Mathematical Statistics 20:46-63.
_______. 1956. “Statistical Inference in Factor Analysis.” Pp. 111-150 in Proceedings of the Third
Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability. Edited by J. Neyman. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin. 1996. “Identification of Causal Effects
Using Instrumental Variables (with Discussion).” Journal of the American Statistical Association
91:444-472.
Arminger, Gerhard, and Bengt O. Muthén. 1998. “A Bayesian Approach to Nonlinear Latent Variable
Models Using the Gibbs sampler and the Metropolis-Hastings Algorithm. Psychometrika 63:271-300.
Bagozzi, Richard P. 1980. Causal Models in Marketing. New York: John Wiley.
Bentler, Peter M. 1980. "Multivariate Analysis with Latent Variables: Causal Modeling." Annual Review
of Psychology 31:419-56.
_______. 1986. "Structural Modeling and Psychometrika: An Historical Perspective on Growth and
Achievement." Psychometrika 51:35-51.
_______. 1995. EQS Program Manual. Encino, CA: Multivariate Software.
Bentler, Peter M., and George Speckart. 1981. “Attitudes ‘Cause’ Behaviors: A Structural Equation
Perspective.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 40:226-38.
Bielby, William T. and Robert M. Hauser. 1977. "Structural Equation Models." Annual Review of
Sociology 3:137-61.
Bielby, William T., Robert M. Hauser, and David L. Featherman. 1977. “Response Errors of Black and
Nonblack Males in Models of the Intergenerational Transmission of Socioeconomic Status.” American
Journal of Sociology 82:1242-88.
Blalock, Hubert M., Jr. 1961a. Causal Inferences in Nonexperimental Research. New York: Norton.
_______. 1961b. “Correlation and Causality: The Multivariate Case.” Social Forces 39:246-251.

46
_______. 1962. “Four-Variable Causal Models and Partial Correlations.” American Journal of Sociology
68:182-194.
_______. 1969. “Multiple Indicators and the Causal Approach to Measurement Error.” American Journal
of Sociology 75:264-73.
_______ (Ed.). 1971. Causal Models in the Social Sciences Chicago, IL: Aldine-Atherton.
Blau, Peter M., and Otis Dudley Duncan. 1967. The American Occupational Structure. New York: John
Wiley and Sons.
Bock, R. Darrell., and M. Lieberman. 1970. “Fitting a Response Model for n Dichotomously scored
items. Psychometrika 35:179-97.
Bollen, Kenneth A. 1987. “Total, Direct, and Indirect Effects in Structural Equation Models.”
Sociological Methodology 17:37-69.
_______. 1989. Introduction to Structural Equation Models with Latent Variables. New York: Wiley.
_______. 1990. “"Outlier Screening and a Distribution-Free Test for Vanishing Tetrads." Sociological
Methods and Research 19:80-92.

_______. 1996. “An Alternative 2SLS Estimator for Latent Variable Models.” Psychometrika,
61:109-21.
Bollen, Kenneth A. and Patrick J. Curran. 2006. Latent Curve Models: A Structural Equation
Perspective. New York: Wiley.
Bollen, Kenneth A., and Lennox. 1991. “Conventional Wisdom on Measurement: A Structural Equation
Perspective.” Psychological Bulletin 110:305-14.
Bollen, Kenneth.A., James B. Kirby, Patrick J. Curran, Pamela M. Paxton, and Feinian Chen. 2007.
“Latent Variable Models under Misspecification: Two Stage Least Squares (2SLS) and Maximum
Likelihood (ML) Estimators.” Sociological Methods and Research 36:46-86.
Bollen, Kenneth A., and Robert A. Stein 1990. “Direct and Indirect Effects: Classical and Bootstrap
Estimates of Variability.” Sociological Methodology 20:115-140.
Bollen, Kenneth A., and Robert A. Stine. 1993. “Bootstrapping Goodness-of-Fit Measures in Structural
Equation Models. Pp. 111-135 in Testing Structural Equation Models. Edited by K.A. Bollen, and J.S.
Long. Newberry Park: Sage Publications.
Bollen, Kenneth A., and Kwok-fai Ting. 1993. “Confirmatory Tetrad Analysis.” Pp. 147-176 in
Sociological Methodology, Vol. 23. Washington, DC: American Sociological Association.
Boomsma, Anne. 1983. On the Robustness of LISREL (maximum likelihood estimation) against Small
Sample Size and Non-Normality. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Groningen,
Groningen.
Boudon, Raymond. 1965. “A Method of Linear Causal Analysis: Dependence Analysis.” American
Sociological Review 30:365-74.

47
Browne, Michael W. 1974. “Generalized Least Squares Estimators in the Analysis of Covariance
Matrices with Linear Structure.” South African Statistical Journal 8:1-24.
_______. 1984. “Asymptotically Distribution-Free Methods for the Analysis of Covariance Structures.”
British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology 37:62-83.
_______. 2000. “Psychometrics.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 95:661-665.
Browne, Michael W., and Robert Cudeck. 1993. “Alternative ways of Assessing Model Fit. Pp. 136-62
in Testing Structural Equation Models. Edited by K.A. Bollen, and J.S. Long. Newberry Park: Sage
Publications.
Chen, Feinian., Patrick J. Curran, Kenneth A. Bollen, James B. Kirby, and Pamela M. Paxton. 2008. “An
Empirical Evaluation of the Use of Fixed Cutoff Points in RMSEA Test Statistics in Structural
Equation Models.” Sociological Methods and Research 36:462-494.
Costner, Herbert L. 1969. “Theory, Deduction, and Rules of Correspondence.” American Journal of
Sociology 75:245-63.
Christoffersson, Anders. 1975. “Factor Analysis of Dichotomized Variables.” Psychometrika 40:5-32.
Connell, Arin, and Alice A. Frye. 2006. “Growth Mixture Modelling in Developmental Psychology:
Overview and Demonstration of Heterogeneity in Developmental Trajectories of Adolescent Antisocial
Behaviour.” Infant and Child Development 15:609-21.
Cowles Commission. 1952. Economic Theory and Measurement: A Twenty Year Research Report, 19321952. Cowles Commission, University of Chicago.
Crow, James F. 1988. “Sewall Wright: 1889-1988.” Genetics 119:1-4.
Dawid, A. P. 2000. “Causal Inference without Counterfactuals.” Journal of the American Statistical
Association 95:407-424 (with discussion).
Deaton, Angus. 2010. “Instruments, Randomization, and Learning about Development.” Journal of
Economic Literature 48:424-55.
Duncan, Otis Dudley. 1966. “Path Analysis: Sociological Examples.” American Journal of Sociology
72:1-16.
_______. 1975. Introduction to Structural Equation Models. New York: Academic Press.
_______. 1992. “What If?” Contemporary Sociology 21:667-8.
Duncan, Otis Dudley, and Robert W. Hodge. 1963. “Education and Occupational Mobility: A Regression
Analysis.” American Journal of Sociology 68:629-44.
Emsley, Richard, Graham Dunn, and Ian R. White. 2010. “Mediation and Moderation of Treatment
Effects in Randomised Controlled Trials of Complex Interventions.” Statistical Methods in Medical
Research 19:237-70.
Engle, R., D. Hendry, and J. Richard. 1983. “Exogeneity.” Econometrica 51:277-304.

48
Epstein, R. J. 1987. A History of Econometrics. Amsterdam, Netherlands: North-Holland.
Freedman, David A. 1987. “As Others See Us: A Case Study in Path Analysis (with Discussion).”
Journal of Educational Statistics 12:101-223.
Frisch, Ragnar. 1934. Statistical Confluence Analysis by Means of Complete Regression Systems. Oslo:
Universitetets Økonomiske Institutt.
Frisch, Ragnar, and Frederick Waugh. 1933. “Partial Time Regressions as Compared with Individual
Trends.” Econometrica 1:387-401.
Glymour, Clark, Richard Scheines, Peter Spirtes, and Kevin Kelly 1987. Discovering Causal Structure:
Artificial Intelligence, Philosophy of Science, and Statistical Modeling. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Glymour, Clark, Peter Spirtes, and Thomas Richardson. 1999. “Response to Rejoinder.’ Pp. 343-45 in
Computation, Causation, and Discovery. Edited by C. Glymour and G. F. Cooper. Menlo Park, CA:
MIT Press.
Goldberger, Arthur S. 1972a. “Structural Equation Methods in the Social Sciences.” Econometrica
40:979-1001.
_______. 1972b. “Maximum-Likelihood Estimation of Regressions Containing Unobservable
Independent Variables.” International Economic Review 13:1-15.
_______, 1973. “Efficient Estimation in Overidentified Models: An Interpretive Analysis.” Pp. 131-52
in Structural Equation Models in the Social Sciences. Edited by A. Goldberger and O.D. Duncan.
New York: Academic Press.
_______. 1991. A Course in Econometrics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Goldberger, Arthur S., and Otis Dudley Duncan (Eds.). 1973. Structural Equation Models in the Social
Sciences. New York: Academic Press.
Goldstein, Harvey. 1995. Multilevel Statistical Models. London: Arnold.
Goldstein, Harvey, and William J. Browne. 2002. “Multilevel Factor Analysis Modelling using Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) Estimation.” Pp. 225-243 in Latent Variable and Latent Structure
Models. Edited by G. Marcoulides and I. Moustaki. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Goldstein, Harvey, and Roderick P. McDonald. 1988. “A General Model for the Analysis of Multi-Level
Data.” Psychometrika 53:455-67.
Greene, William H. 2003. Econometric Analysis. Fifth Edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Greenland, Sander, and Babette Brumback. 2002. “An Overview of Relations Among Causal Modelling
Methods.” International Epidemiology Association 31:1030-7.
Greenland, Sander, Judea Pearl, and James M. Robbins. 1999. “Causal Diagrams for Epidemiologic
Research.” Epidemiology 10:37-48.
Haavelmo, T.1943. “The Statistical Implications of a System of Simultaneous Equations.” Econometrica
11:1-12.

49
_______. 1944. “The Probability Approach in Econometrics.” Econometrica, Supplement, 12:1-114.
Hansen, Lars Peter. 1982. “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators.”
Econometrica 50:1029-54.
Hargens, Lowell L., Barbara F. Reskin, and Paul D. Allison. 1976. “Problems in Estimating Measurement
Error from Panel Data: An Example Involving the Measurement of Scientific Productivity.
Sociological Methods and Research 5:247-56.
Harman, Harry. 1960. Modern Factor Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hauser, Robert M. 1973. “Disaggregating a Social-Psychological Model of Educational Attainment.” Pp.
255-84 in Structural Equation Models in the Social Sciences. Edited by A. S. Goldberger and O. D.
Duncan. New York: Academic Press.
Hauser, Robert M., and Arthur S. Goldberger. 1971. "The Treatment of Unobservable Variables in Path
Analysis." Pp. 81-87 in Sociological Methodology 1971, edited by H.L. Costner.
Heckman, James J. 1992. “Haavelmo and the Birth of Modern Econometrics: A Review of the History of
Econometric Ideas by Mary Morgan.” Journal of Economic Literature 30:876-86.
_______. 2000. “Causal Parameters and Policy Analysis in Economics: A Twentieth Century
Retrospective.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115:45-97.
_______. 2010. “Building Bridges Between Structural and Program Evaluation Approaches to Evaluating
Policy.” Journal of Economic Literature 48:356-98.
Heckman, James J., and Sergio Urzúa. 2010. “Comparing IV with Structural Models: What Simple IV
can and cannot Identify.” Journal of Econometrics 156:27-37.
Hendry, David F., and Mary S. Morgan. 1989. “A Re-Analysis of Confluence Analysis.” Oxford
Economic Papers 41:35-52.
Hill, William G. 1995. “Sewell Wright’s System of Mating.” Genetics 143:1499-1506.
Holland, Paul. 1988. “Causal Inference and Path Analysis.” Pp. 449-84 in Sociological Methodology
1988, edited by C.C. Clogg. Washington, DC: American Sociological Association.
Holzinger, Karl J. 1941. Factor Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hotelling, Harold. 1933. “Analysis of a Complex of Statistical Variables into Principal Components.”
Journal of Educational Psychology 24:417-41, 498-520.
Humphreys, Paul, and David Freedman. 1996. “The Grand Leap.” The British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science 47:113-23.
Hurwicz, Leonid. 1962. “On the Structural Form and Interdependent Systems.” Pp. 232-39 in Logic,
Methodology and Philosophy of Science, edited by E. Nagel, P. Suppes, and A. Tarski. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.

50
Imbens, Guido W. 2010. “Better LATE Than Nothing: Some Comments on Deaton (2009) and Heckman
and Urzua (2009).” Journal of Economic Literature 48:399-423.
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist. 1994. “Identification and Estimation of Local Average
Treatment Effects.” Econometrica 62:467-75.
Imbens, Guido W., and Donald B. Rubin. 1997. “Estimating Outcome Distributions for Compliers in
Instrumental Variables Models.” The Review of Economic Studies 64: 555-74.
Imbens, Guido W., and Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2009. “Recent Developments in the Econometrics of
Program Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Literature 47: 5–86.
Jeffreys, Harold. 1935. “Some Tests of Significance, Treated by the Theory of Probability.” Proceedings
of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 31:203-22.
Jennrich, R.I., and Clarkson. 1980. “A Feasible Method for Standard Errors of Estimate in Maximum
Likelihood Factor Analysis.” Psychometrika 45:237-247.
Jennrich, R.I., and Robinson, S.M. 1969. “A Newton-Raphson Algorithm for Maximum Likelihood
Factor Analysis.” Psychometrika 34:111-123.
Jennrich, R. I., and Sampson, P.F. 1966. “Rotation for Simple Loadings.” Psychometrika 31:313-323.
Jo, Booil, and Bengt O. Muthén. 2002. “Longitudinal Studies with Intervention and Noncompliance:
Estimation of Causal Effects in Growth Mixture Modeling.” Pp. 71-98 in Multilevel Modeling:
Methodological Advances, Issues, and Applications. Edited by S. P. Reise and N. Duan. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Jöreskog, Karl G. 1967. “Some Contributions to Maximum Likelihood Factor Analysis.” Psychometrika
32:443-82.
_______. 1969. “A General Approach to Confirmatory Maximum Likelihood Factor Analysis.”
Psychometrika 34:183-202.
_______. 1970. “A General Method for Analysis of Covarriance Structures.” Biometrika 57:239-51.
_______. 1971a. “Statistical Analysis of Sets of Congeneric Tests.” Psychometrika 36:109-33.
_______. 1971b. “Simultaneous Factor Analysis in Several Populations.” Psychometrika 36:409-26.
_______. 1973. “A General Method for Estimating a Linear Structural Equation System.” Pp. 85-112 in
Structural Equation Models in the Social Sciences. Edited by A. Goldberger and O.D. Duncan. New
York: Academic Press.
_______. 1978. “Structural Analysis of Covariance and Correlation Matrices.” Psychometrika 36:109-33.
Jöreskog, Karl G. and Arthur S. Goldberger. 1975. "Estimation of a Model with Multiple Indicators and
Multiple Causes of a Single Latent Variable." Journal of the American Statistical Association
70:631-39.
Jöreskog, Karl G., and Dag Sörbom. 2001. LISREL 8 User's Reference Guide. Chicago: Scientific
Software International.

51
_______. 2002. PRELIS 2 User's Reference Guide. Chicago: Scientific Software International.
Jöreskog, Karl G., and Fan Yang. 1996. Nonlinear Structural Equation Models: The Kenny-Judd Model
with Interaction Effects.” Pp. 57-88 in Advanced Structural Equation Modeling: Issues and
Techniques. Edited by G.A. Marcoulides and R.E. Schumacker. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Judge, George G., William E. Griffiths, R. Carter Hill, and Tsoung-Chao Lee. 1980. The Theory and
Practice of Econometrics. New York: John Wiley.
Kaiser, H.F. 1958. “The Varimax Criterion for Analytic Rotation in Factor Analysis.” Psychometrika
23:187-200.
Keesling, J.W. 1972. Maximum Likelihood Approaches to Causal Flow Analysis. Ph.D. Dissertation,
Department of Education, University of Chicago.
Kendall, Sir Maurice, and Alan Stuart. 1979. The Advanced Theory of Statistics, Vol. 3: Inference and
Relationship. London: Griffin.
Kenny, David, and Charles M. Judd. 1984. “Estimating the Nonlinear and Interactive Effects of Latent
Variables.” Psychological Bulletin 96:201-10.
Kiiveri, Harri, and T.P. Speed. 1982. “Structural Analysis of Multivariate Data: A Review.” Pp. 209-289
in Sociological Methodology 1982. Edited by S. Leinhardt. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Klein, Lawrence. 1950. Economic Fluctuations in the United States 1921-1941. New York: John Wiley.
Klein, Lawrence, and Arthur S. Goldberger. 1955. An Econometric Model of the United States 19291952. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Kohn, Melvin, and Carmi Schooler. 1982. “Job Conditions and Personality: A Longitudinal Assessment
of their Reciprocal Effects.” American Journal of Sociology 87:1257-86.
Koopmans, Tjalling.1937. Linear Regression Analysis of Economic Time Series. Netherlands Economic
Institute, Publication No. 20. Haarlem: F. Bohn.
_______. 1945. “Statistical Estimation of Simultaneous Economic Relations.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 40:488-66.
Koopmans, Tjalling, Herman Rubin, and Roy Leipnik. 1950. “Measuring the Equation Systems of
Dynamic Economics.” Pp. 53-237 in Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models. Cowles
Commission Monograph 10. Edited by T. Koopmans. New York: John Wiley.
Lawley, D.N. 1940. “The Estimation of Factor Loadings by the method of Maximum Likelihood.”
Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 60:64-82.
Lee, Sik-Yum Lee. 1981. “A Bayesian Approach to Confirmatory Factor Analysis.” Psychometrika
46:153-60.
Li, C.C. 1956. “The Concept of Path Coefficient and its Impact on Population Genetics.” Biometrics
12:190-210.

52
_______. 1975. Path Analysis: A Primer. Pacific Grove, CA: Boxworth Press.
Lucas, Robert. 1976. “Econometric Policy Analysis: A Critique.” Pp. 19-46 in The Phillips Curve and
Labor Markets. Edited by K. Brunner and A. Meltzer. Amsterdam: North Holland.
MacCallum, Robert C., Michael W. Browne, and Hazuki M. Sugawara. 1996. “Power Analysis and
Determination of Sample Size for Covariance Structure Modeling.” Psychological Methods 1:130-49.
Magnus, Jan R., and Mary S. Morgan. 1987. “The ET Interview: Professor J. Tinbergen.” Econometric
Theory 3:117-42.
Mann, Henry B., and Abraham Wald. 1943. “On the Statistical Treatment of Linear Stochastic Difference
Equations.” Econometrica 11:173-220.
Matsueda, Ross L., and William T. Bielby. 1986. “Statistical Power in Covariance Structure Models.”
Pp. 120-158 in Sociological Methodology 1986. Edited by N. B. Tuma. Washington, DC: American
Sociological Association.
Matsueda, Ross L. 1982. “Testing Control Theory and Differential Association: A Causal Modeling
Approach. American Sociological Review.” American Sociological Review 47:489-504.
Matsueda, Ross L., and Karen Heimer. 1987. “Race, Family Structure, and Delinquency: A Test of
Differential Association and Social Control Theories.” American Sociological Review 52:826-40.
Meredith, William, and John Tisak. 1990. “Latent Curve Analysis.” Psychometrika 55:107-22.
Morgan, Mary S. 1990. The History of Econometric Ideas. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Morgan, Stephen L., and Christopher Winship. 2007. Counterfactuals and Causal Inference: Methods
and Principles for Social Research. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Muthén, Bengt. 1978. “Contributions to Factor Analysis of Dichotomous Variables.” Psychometrika
43:551-60.
_______. 1979. “A Structural Probit Model with Latent Variables.” Journal of the American Statistical
Association 74:807-11.
_______. 1984. “A General Structural Equation Model with Dichotomous, Ordered Categorical, and
Continuous Latent Variable Indicators.” Psychometrika 49:115-32.
_______. 1989. “Tobit Factor Analysis.” British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology
42:241-50.
_______. 1994. “Multi-Level Covariance Structure Analysis.” Sociological Methods and Research
22:376-98.
_______. 1997. “Modeling of Longitudinal and Multi-Level Data.” Pp. 453-80 in Sociological
Methodology Vol. 27. Edited by A.E. Raftery. Boston, MA: Blackwell.
_______. 2004. “Latent Variable Analysis: Growth Mixture Modeling and Related Techniques For
Longitudinal Data.” Pp. 345-68 in Handbook of Quantitative Methodology for the Social Sciences.
Edited by D. Kaplan. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

53
Muthén, Bengt O, and Linda K. Muthén. 2004. Mplus User’s Guide. Los Angeles, CA: Muthén and
Muthén.
Nagin, Daniel S. 2005. Group-Based Models of Development. Cambridge: MA: Harvard University
Press.
Nagin, Daniel S., and Kenneth C. Land. 1993. “Age, Criminal Careers, and Population Heterogeneity:
Specification and Estimation of a Nonparametric Mixed Poisson Model.” Criminology 31:327-62.
Nagin, Daniel S., and Richard E. Tremblay. 2005. “What has been Learned from Group-Based Trajectory
Modeling? Examples from Physical Aggression and Other Problem Behaviors.” Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science 602:82-117.
Nelson, Charles R. 1972. “The Prediction Performance of the FRB-MIT-PENN Model of the U.S.
Economy.” American Economic Review 62:902-917.
Neyman, Jerzy, and Egon Pearson. 1933. “On the Problem of the Most Efficient Tests of Statistical
Hypotheses.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers
of a Mathematical or Physical Character 231:289–337
Olsson, Ulf. 1979. “Maximum Likelihood Estimation of the Polychoric Correlation Coefficient.”
Psychometrika 44:443-60.
Pearl, Judea. 1988. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems. San Mateo, CA:Morgan Kaufmann.
_______. 2000. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Pearl, Judea, and Thomas Verma. 1991. “A Theory of Inferred Causation.” Pp. 441-52 in Principles of
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning: Proceedings of the Second International Conference.
Edited by J. A. Allen, R. Fikes, and E. Sandewall. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufman Publishers.
Pearson, Karl. 1901a. “On Lines and Planes of Closest Fit to Systems of Points in Space.” Philosophical
Magazine 6:559-72.
_______. 1901b. “Mathematical Contribution to the Theory of Evolution. VII: On the Correlation of
Characters not Quantitatively Measurable.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 195:147.
Pearson, Karl, and David Heron. 1913. “On Theories of Association.” Biometrika 9:159-315.
Poon, Wai-Yin, and Sik-Yum Lee. 1987. “Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Multivariate Polyserial
and Polychoric Correlation Coefficients.” Psychometrika 52:429-430.
Qin, Duo. 1989. “Formalization of Identification Theory.” Oxford Economic Papers 41:73-93.
Rabe-Hesketh, Sophia, Anders Skrondal, and Andrew Pickles. 2004. “Generalized Multilevel Structural
Equation Modeling.” Psychometrika 69:167-90.

54
Rabe-Hesketh, Sophia, Andrew Pickles, and Anders Skrondal. 2001. GLLAMM Manual. Tech. rept.
2001/01. Department of Biostatistics and Computing, Institute of Psychiatry, Kings College, University
of London. Downloadable from http://www.gllamm.org.
Raftery Adrian E. 1993. “Bayesian Model Selection in Structural Equation Models.” Pp. 163-80 in
Testing Structural Equation Models. Edited by K.A. Bollen, and J.S. Long. Newberry Park: Sage
Publications.
_______. 1995. “Bayesian Model Selection in Social Research.” Pp. 111-65 in Sociological Methodology
1995. Edited by P.V. Marsden. Washington, DC: American Sociological Association.
Rao, C.R. 1958. “Some Statistical Methods for Comparison of Growth Curves.” Biometrika: 51:83-90.
Raudenbush, Steven W., and Anthony S. Bryk. 2002. Hierarchical Linear Models. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Raudenbush, Steven W., and Robert J. Sampson 1999. “Assessing Direct and Indirect Associations in
Multi-Level Designs with Latent Variables.” Sociological Methods and Research 28:123-153.
Robins, James M. 1986. “A New Approach to Causal Inference in Mortality Studies with a Sustained
Exposure Period: Application to Control of Healthy Worker Survivor Effect.” Mathematical Modeling
7:1393-1512.
_______. 1995. “Comment on Judea Pearl’s Paper, ‘Causal Diagrams for Empirical Research.”
Biometrika 82:695-98.
_______. 2003. “Semantics of Causal DAG Models and the Identification of Direct and Indirect Effects.”
Pp. 70-81 in Highly Structured Stochastic Systems. Edited by P. Green, N. Hjort, and S. Richardson.
Oxford University Press.
Robins, James M., and Sander Greenland. 1992. “Identifiability and Exchangeability for Direct and
Indirect Effects.” Epidemiology 3:143-55.
Robins, James M., and Larry Wasserman. 1999. “On the Impossibility of Inferring Causatin from
Association without Background Knowledge.” Pp. 305-321 in Computation, Causation, and
Discovery. Edited by C. Glymour and G. F. Cooper. Menlo Park, CA: MIT Press.
Roy, A.D. 1951 “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Economic Papers 3:135-46.
Rubin, Donald B. 1974. “Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized nd Nonrandomized
Studies.” Journal of Educational Psychology 66:688-701.
_______. 1980. “Comment on ‘Randomization Analysis of Experimental Data: The Fisher
Randomization Test,’ by D. Basu.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 75:591-93.
Satorra, Albert, and Willem E. Saris. 1985. “Power of the Likelihood Ratio Test in Covariance Structure
Analysis.” Psychometrika 50:83-90.
Schultz, Henry. 1938. The Theory and Measurement of Demand. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schwartz, G. 1978. “Estimating the Dimension of a Model.” Annals of Statistics 6:461-64.

55
Scheines, Richard., Peter Spirtes, Clark Glymour, Christopher Meek, and Thomas Richardson. 1997.
Tetrad 3 User's Manual. Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University.
Scheines, Richard, Herbert Hoijtink, and Anne Boomsma. 1999. “Bayesian Estimation and Testing of
Structural Equation Models.” Psychometrika 64:37-52.
Sewell, William H., and Robert M. Hauser. 1975. Education, Opportunity, and Earnings: Achievement in
the Early Career. New York: Academic Press.
Shipley, Bill. 2000. Cause and Correlation in Biology; A User’s Guide to Path Analysis, Structural
Equations and Causal Inference. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Simmons, Roberta, and D.A. Blyth. 1987. Moving into Adolescence: The Impact of Pubertal Change and
School Context. New York: Aldine De Gruber.
Simon, Herbert A. 1954. “Spurious Correlation: A Causal Interpretation.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association. 49:467-79.
Sims, Christopher. 1980. “Macroeconomics and Reality.” Econometrica 48:1-45.
Skrondal, Anders, and Sophia Rabe-Hesketh. 2004. Generalized Latent Variable Modeling: Multilevel,
Longitudinal, and Structural Equation Models. Boca Raton: Chapman and Hall.
Slutsky, Eugen. 1937. “The Summation of Random Causes as the Source of Cyclic Processes.”
Econometrica 5:105-46.
Sobel, Michael E. 1982. “Asymptotic Confidence Intervals for Indirect Effects in Structural Equation
Models.” Pp. 290-313 in Sociological Methodology 1982. Edited by S. Leinhardt. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
_______. 1986. "Some New Results on Indirect Effects and their Standard Errors in Covariance Structure
Models." Pp. 159-86 in Sociological Methodology 1986, edited by N.B. Tuma. Washington, D.C.:
American Sociological Association.
_______. 1992. “The American Occupational Structure and Structural Equation Modeling in Sociology.”
Contemporary Sociology 21:662-666.
_______. 2008. “Identification of Causal Parameters in Randomized Studies with Mediating Variables.”
Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics 33:230-51.
Spearman, Charles. 1904. “General Intelligence, Objectively Determined and Measured.” American
Journal of Psychology 15:201-93.
_______.1927. The Abilities of Man. New York: Macmillan Co.
Spirtes, Peter, Clark Glymour, and Richard Scheines. 1993. Causation, Prediction, and Search. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Spirtes, Peter, Thomas Richardson, Christopher Meek, Richard Scheines, and Clark Glymour. 1995.
“Using Path Diagrams as a Structural Equation Modeling Tool.” Sociological Methods and Research
27:182-225.

56
Steiger. J. H. 1990. “Structural Model Evaluation and Modification: An Interval Estimation Approach.”
Multivariate Behavioral Research 25:173-80.
Steiger, James H., and John C.Lind. 1980. “Statistically-Based Tests for the Number of Common
Factors.” Handout for a talk at the Annual Meetings of the Psychometric Society, Iowa City, IA.
Stock, James H., and Francesco Trebbi. 2003. “Who Invented Instrumental Variable Regression?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 17:177-194.
Theil, Henri. (1953) 1992. “Estimation and Simultaneous Correlation in Complete Equation Systems.
Chapter 6 in Henri Theil’s Contributions to Economics and Econometrics. Vol 1. Edited by R.
Baldev and J. Koerts. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.
Thurstone, L. L. 1935. The Vectors of Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Tinbergen, Jan. 1939. Statistical Testing of Business Cycle Theories. Two Volumes. Geneva: League of
Nations.
Tucker, Ledyard. R. 1955. “The Objective Definition of Simple Structure in Linear Factor Analysis.”
Psychometrika 20:209-25
_______. 1958. “Determination of Parameters of a Functional Relation by Factor Analysis.”
Psychometrika 23:19-23.
Wermuth, Nanny, and Steffen L. Lauritsen. 1983. “Graphical and Recursive Models for Contingency
Tables.” Biometrika 70:537-52.
Wheaton, Blair. 1978. “The Sociogenesis of Psychological Disorder.” American Sociological Review
43:383-403.
_______. 1985. “Models for the Stress-Buffering Functions of Coping Resources.” Journal of Health
and Social Behavior 26:352-364
Wiley, David E. 197wright 3. “The Identification Problem for Structural Equation Models with
Unmeasured Variables.” Pp. 69-84 in Structural Equation Models in the Social Sciences. Edited by A.
Goldberger and O.D. Duncan. New York: Academic Press.
Winship, Christopher, and Robert D. Mare. 1983. “Structural Equations and Path Analysis for Discrete
Data.” American Journal of Sociology 89:54-110.
_______. 1984. “Regression Models with Ordinal Variables.” American Sociological Review 49:512-25.
Wold, Herman. 1964. Econometric Model Building: Essays on th4e Causal Chain Approach.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
_______. 1982. “Soft Modeling: The Basic Design and Some Extensions.” Pp. 1-54 in Systems Under
Indirect Observation. Edited by KG. Jöreskog and H. Wold. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Wright, Phillip G. 1915. “Moore’s Economic Cycles.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 29:631-41.
_______1928. The Tariff on Animal and Vegetable Oils. New York: Macmillan.

57
Wright, Sewall. 1918. “On the Nature of Size Factors.” Genetics 3:367-374.
_______. 1920. “The Relative Importance of Heredity and Environment in Determining the Piebald
Pattern of Guinea Pigs.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 6:320-32.
_______. 1921a. “Correlation and Causation.” Journal of Agricultural Research 20:557-585.
_______. 1921b. “Systems of Mating. I. The Biometric Relations Between Parent and Offspring.”
Genetics 6:111-23.
_______. 1925. Corn and Hog Correlations. Washington, D.C.: Us Department of Agriculture Bulletin
1300.
_______. 1934. “The Method of Path Coefficients.” Annals of Mathematical Statistics 5:161-215.
Xie, Yu. 2007. “Otis Dudley Duncan’s Legacy: The Demographic Approach to Quantitative Reasoning
in Social Science.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 25:141-56.
Yang, Mingan, and David B. Dunson. 2010. “Bayesian Semiparametric Structural Equation Models with
Latent Variables.” Psychometrika, Forthcoming.
Yuan, Ke-Hai, and Peter M. Bentler. 2007. “Structural Equation Modeling.” Pp. 297-358 in Handbook of
Statistics, Vol. 26. Psychometrics. Edited by C.R. Rao and S. Sinharay. Amsterdam, North-Holland.
Yule, George Udney. 1896. “On the Correlation of Total Pauperism with Proportion of Out-relief. II.
Males over 65.” Economic Journal 6:613-623.
_______. 1912. On the Methods of Measuring Association Between Two Attributes. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society 75:579-652.
_______. 1932. An Introduction to the Theory of Statistics. 10th Edition. London: Charles Griffin and Co.
Zellner, Arnold. 1962. “An Efficient Method of Estimating Seemingly Unrelated Regressions and Tests
of Aggregation Bias.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 57:348-68.
_______. 1970. “Estimation of Regression Relationships Containing Unobservable Independent
Variables.” International Economic Review 11:441-54.
_______. 1971. Introduction to Bayesian Inference in Econometrics. New York: John Wiley.
Zellner, Arnold, and Henri Theil. 1962. “Three-Stage Least Squares: Simultaneous Estimation of
Simultaneous Equations.” Econometrica 30:54-78.

58

Figure 1. An early path diagram on the importance of heredity and environment in spotted guinea pigs
from Sewall Wright (1921b). (Copyright granted by the Genetics Society of America.)

59

ζ2
β21

η1
λ11

1.0

η2
λ32

1.0

y1

y2

y3

y4

ε1

ε2

ε3

ε4

Figure 2. Path diagram of a walking dog model in four observables and two latent variables.

60

x1

ζ
γ11

γ 21
x2

β11

y1

ε1

y2

ε2

η1
1.0

Figure 3. Path diagram of a multiple-indicator multiple-indicator cause (MIMIC) model.

61

ε1

ε2

ε3

ε4

y1

y2

y3

y4

1

1

1
1

α

1

2

3

β1

4
4

9

16

1

β2

Figure 4. Path diagram of a four-wave quadratic latent curve model.

62

u
X

a

M

c

u
v

b
Y

Model A

v

X

a

M

b

Y

Model B

Figure 5. Path diagram of models with direct and indirect effects.

63

ξ

η
λ1

1.0

1.0

Z
σzx

λ2

Z

ζ1

σzy
ζ2

ζ2
X

β
Model A

Y

X

β

Y

Model B

Figure 6. Path diagram of a model in which controlling for an exogenous variable creates bias.

