Bayesian Learning about Ideal Points
of U.S. Supreme Court Justices, 1953-1999∗
Andrew D. Martin†

Kevin M. Quinn‡

Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
University of Washington
Working Paper no. 16
July 23, 2001

Abstract

At the heart of attitudinal and strategic explanations of judicial behavior is the assumption that justices have policy preferences. These preferences have been measured
in a handful of ways, including using factor analysis and multidimensional scaling techniques (Schubert, 1965, 1974), looking at past votes in a single policy area (Epstein
et al., 1989), content-analyzing newspaper editorials at the time of appointment to the
Court (Segal and Cover, 1989), and recording the background characteristics of the justices (Tate and Handberg, 1991). In this manuscript we employ Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) methods to ﬁt Bayesian measurement models of judicial preferences for
all justices serving on the U.S. Supreme Court from 1953 to 1999. We are particularly
interested in considering to what extent ideal points of justices change throughout their
tenure on the Court, and how the proposals over which they are voting also change
across time. To do so, we ﬁt four longitudinal item response models that include dynamic speciﬁcations for the ideal points and the case-speciﬁc parameters. Our results
suggest that justices do not have constant ideal points, even after controlling for the
types of cases that come before the Court.

∗

We would like to thank Michael Bailey, Scott Comparato, Lee Epstein, Mark Handcock, Peter Hoﬀ, Rich Pacelle,
Keith Poole, Adrian Raftery, Kate Stovel, and Steve Van Winkle for useful discussions along the way. All analyses
were performed on Linux workstations using code written by the authors in C++ using the Scythe Statistical Library
(Martin and Quinn 2001b). We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Center in Political Economy at
Washington University. Data for replication can be obtained from the Supreme Court Database website at Michigan
State University (http://www.ssc.msu.edu/∼pls/pljp/sctdata.html). Documented C++ code for these models will
be available Fall 2001 at the authors’ websites.
†
Department of Political Science, Washington University, Campus Box 1063, One Brookings Drive, St. Louis, MO
63130-4899, admartin@artsci.wustl.edu
‡
Department of Political Science and Center for Statistics in the Social Sciences, Box 354322, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-4322, quinn@stat.washington.edu

1

1

Introduction

Whether one adopts an attitudinal (Segal and Spaeth, 1993) or strategic (Eskridge, 1991; Epstein
and Knight, 1998) theoretical model of decision making on the Supreme Court, the key explanatory
variables are the policy preferences of the justices. In this paper, we tackle the following question:
Do ideal points of U.S. Supreme Court justices change over time? There are reasons to believe
that they do not, as justices are sophisticated politicians, typically with vast experience on the
bench. In reviewing the literature, Epstein et al. (1998) summarize the conventional wisdom in
the judicial politics ﬁeld: “[t]he occasional anomaly notwithstanding, most jurists evince consistent
voting behavior over the course of their careers” (p. 801). On the other hand, it is plausible that
as justices learn by deciding new and diﬀerent cases, their world view – and thus their ideal points
– change over time. Recent work by Epstein et al. (1998) demonstrate the the preferences of some
justices may in fact change systematically over time. Of course, so too do the policy proposals
that come to the Court, and the types of cases the justices hear. Does this mean that preferences
change, or that the agenda changes?
The purpose of this paper is to present a handful of models that can be used to estimate the
ideal points of Supreme Court justices. This is well-tread methodological ground; in every decade
since the 1950s, scores of articles have been published that estimate ideal points for legislatures
and courts using various techniques. The seminal work in the judicial politics subﬁeld is Schubert’s
The Judicial Mind (1965). He presents a comprehensive look at the attitudes and ideologies of all
Supreme Court justices serving from the end of the Roosevelt era to the beginning of the Johnson
administration. His i-points (what we would now term ideal points) and j-points (the case stimuli),
along with his C scale (political liberalism) and E scale (economics), became an important part
of the judicial politics vernacular, and let to a “behavioral revolution” in the study of Supreme
Court decision making. Perhaps the best example in the legislative politics subﬁeld is the work by
Keith Poole and Howard Rosenthal, who study the entirety of roll call voting in the United States
House and Senate (Poole and Rosenthal, 1991a, 1997). Not only have their measures informed a
2

generation of Congress scholars, but the computational tools brought to the problem were quite
innovative.
As detailed below, we depart from the existing literature in two fundamental ways. First, we
explicitly model the longitudinal nature of the data, allowing both ideal points and case-speciﬁc
parameters to vary systematically over time. This is similar in spirit to the D-NOMINATE model
proposed by Poole and Rosenthal, but our approach is quite diﬀerent in terms of speciﬁcation and
estimation strategy. Second, we adopt a Bayesian approach. But for the development of Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the models we propose
would have been intractable. Others have performed Bayesian inference for standard item response
models (Albert, 1992; Patz and Junker, 1999) and item response models applied to congressional
voting data (Clinton et al., 2000; Jackman, 2001), but to our knowledge no one has developed
models for multiple cross-sections of votes that ﬂexibly model the temporal dependence that one
might expect to ﬁnd.1
The main substantive ﬁndings of this paper are that even after controlling for the dynamics
of issue creation in the lower courts, there is strong evidence to support the assertion that many
justices’ revealed preferences have changed (in some cases dramatically) over time. In many cases,
these dynamics do not appear to be linear or quadratic functions of time. In addition, we ﬁnd
evidence that the rulings of lower courts that come under review by the Supreme Court have
generally become increasingly liberal over time. Recently, the rulings of the Supreme Court have
tended to become more conservative.
This paper proceeds as follows. In the following section we review other approaches scholars
have employed to measure judicial preferences. This is followed in Section 3 by a presentation
1

Bailey and Chang (2001) allow the ideal points of Supreme Court justices to vary across time in their measurement
model of Supreme Court ideal points. Their model assumes linear or quadratic trajectories based on the conclusions
of Epstein et al. (1998). As discussed below, the conclusions drawn by Epstein et al. (1998) are open to some criticism;
and, as a result, so too are the Bailey and Chang (2001) estimates. Additionally, no standard errors are reported
for the ideal point estimates, so it is unclear whether real trending is taking place. A better approach is to choose a
functional form that allows the data to speak about which justices’ preferences change over time, as well as the form
of that change.

3

of the standard item response model which can be employed if justices are assumed to have constant preferences. In Section Four, we assume that ideal points are independent and identically
distributed across time, and ﬁt a model based on that assumption. This is followed by our ﬁrst
dynamic model, where we assume that a justice’s ideal point follows a Gaussian random walk. In
Section Six, we extend this model one step further, and jointly model the dynamics in the ideal
points and case-speciﬁc parameters. The ﬁnal section concludes with a discussion of directions for
future research.

2

Measuring Judicial Preferences

Over the last ﬁfty years many scholars have devoted a substantial amount of energy estimating
ideal points for Supreme Court justices. The reason for this work is clear: regardless of theoretical
approach, one requires a measure of the ideal policy position of each justice (or the Court, which is
typically measured using the median justice) to explain judicial behavior. Here we remain agnostic
as to whether justices behave attitudinally or strategically.2 Like many previous scholars, we are
interested in estimating the policy preferences of justices. Unlike many others, we are not interested
in creating a set of preference measures that can be simply plugged into regression models of various
sorts as either left-hand-side or right-hand-side variables. Indeed, we believe that such approaches
are often inappropriate since the assumptions often used to construct the measures of preferences
are inconsistent with aspects of the regression models used by future researchers. Instead, we
believe that if one wants to make causal inferences about the eﬀects of policy preferences, case
characteristics, and other relevant independent variables on Supreme Court voting behavior, one
must specify a structural model derived from theory and ﬁt the resulting model. This is what we
pursue in this paper.
The ﬁrst generation of research relating to ideal point estimation grew from the work of Schubert
(1959). Schubert (1965) applied various scaling models to votes on the Court, and ﬁnds two primary
2

The attitudinal model is based on psychological stimulus-response models, while strategic approaches are based
on economic rational actor models. Both can be viewed in terms of the spatial voting model (Downs, 1957; Enelow
and Hinich, 1984), where each actor has an ideal point and votes for the policy alternative closest to that point. For
expositional economy, we employ the parlance of the spatial voting model throughout this paper.

4

dimensions – political and economic liberalism – that explain votes on the merits for the Court
from the late 1940s to the early 1960s. Nine years later, Schubert (1974) again ﬁnds that these two
dimensions structure behavior through the Vinson and Warren Courts. The use of latent variable
models to measure ideal points continued in the work of Rohde and Spaeth (1976), who ﬁnd three
dimensions that structure the Warren Court and ﬁrst ﬁve terms of the Burger Court: freedom,
equality, and what they term “New Dealism,” and Spaeth (1990) who considers civil liberties subscales on the Burger Court. In this vein, Martin and Quinn (2001a) ﬁt item response models
to data from the seventh Burger Court. They develop models speciﬁcally suited to mediate the
‘micro-committee problem’ that plagues the study of the Supreme Court.
A similar approach relies on using past behavior in a policy area to explain votes in the same
policy area in the future. Epstein et al. (1989) look at ﬁnal case decisions in all criminal justice
cases before the Supreme Court between 1946 and 1986, and gauge the preferences of the Court
by using the percentage of pro-criminal rights decisions in the previous term. Similarly, Segal and
Spaeth (1989) report the fraction of liberal decision on civil liberties and economic cases for all
justices serving between 1953 and 1985. They ﬁnd a great deal of variance within and between
these two salient dimensions.
Other scholars have developed a handful of novel measures not based on the votes of the justices:
Segal and Cover (1989) content analyze newspaper editorials at the time of appointment to the
Court, and Tate and Handberg (1991) record background characteristics of the justices. The most
widely used of these measures are the Segal and Cover (1989) scores, which were updated by Segal
et al. (1995) to include the Bush appointees, and backdated for seven Roosevelt and four Truman
nominees. Epstein and Mershon (1996) perform a “methodological audit” of this measure, and
demonstrate that it should only be used for their designed purpose: explaining aggregated civil
liberties votes. It is interesting to note that these scores explain less than 20% of the variance in
economics cases, the other salient dimension documented in previous scholarship.
A key theoretical assumption on which both attitudinal and strategic models of Supreme Court
5

behavior rest is the idea of preferences being ﬁxed over time. The work of Schubert (1974), Baum
(1988), Segal and Cover (1989), and many others suggest that the ideal points of justices rarely
change. Epstein et al. (1998) challenge this notion, and seek to discover whether or not preferences
do change. The preference measure they employ is the Baum-corrected percentage of each justice’s
votes in the liberal direction on civil liberties cases in each term (Baum, 1988). This correction
subtracts the median diﬀerence between a justice in the previous term and the current term from all
justices, and is geared to control for agenda changes. Of the sixteen justices under study, Epstein
et al. ﬁnd nine justices that exhibit changes over time. Not only did they include the justices
which previous studies have demonstrated change over time, such as Black (Ulmer, 1973; Atkins
and Sloope, 1986), Douglas (Ulmer, 1981), and Blackmun (Baum, 1992), but they also included
some surprises like Frankfurter and Powell. Some justices – not surprisingly many of which are
at the ends of the ideological spectrum – demonstrated no change, such as Brennan, Burger, and
Marshall.
There are some weaknesses of the Epstein et al. (1998) study which make its conclusions somewhat suspect. First, without explicitly modeling case-speciﬁc parameters, it is impossible to know
whether the Baum correction adequately controls for the changing nature of the cases that are
heard by the Court. Second, the dependent variable in the analysis (percent liberal on civil liberties cases) is treated as if it is a known quantity. However, with the small number of cases
heard in each term, it is important to account for the inherent uncertainty in the measure. Third,
this approach makes the theoretical assumption that ideal points are independent and identically
distributed across terms. This is theoretically problematic, as we would expect some continuity
in each justices’ outlook. Finally, this approach is not based on a fully parameterized statistical
model, which makes inference diﬃcult.
As Epstein et al. (1998) argue, whether or not the ideal points of Supreme Court justices change
over time is a very important issue. The answer to the question will dictate the manner in which
future scholars should measure preferences. If it is the case that ideal points do change, this has
6

profound implications for how all sorts of future research should be conducted, and it calls into
question previous research ﬁndings. In this paper we pursue this question in the context of item
response modeling. We begin by positing four theoretical models of judicial decision making across
time, and then directly operationalize them into statistical models. Such a structural model has the
property that if the theoretical model is correct, thus implying that the posited statistical assumptions hold, then such a model can explain votes in terms of preferences even though preferences are
treated as latent variables.3

3

Modeling Supreme Court Decision Making

Our focus in this paper are the T = 47 terms of the Court from 1953 to 1999. In this preliminary
model, we assume that during this time period each justice has a ﬁxed ideal point.4 We obtain
our data from The United States Supreme Court Judicial Database (Spaeth, 1999). We select all
non-unanimous cases that are either formally decided cases with written opinions after full oral
argument or cases decided by an equally divided vote.5 This results in votes for J = 29 justices
who served in this time period. On a given case, at most nine justices cast a vote. A grand total
of K = 3210 cases were decided, with an average of sixty-eight cases per term. The most active
Courts sat during the 1972 and 1986 terms, deciding ninety-eight cases. The least active was the
1996 term that decided only forty-one cases.
The observed data matrix Y is thus a (K × J) matrix of votes and missing values. We can also
partition this matrix by term t, and thus discuss the submatrices Yt. We code all votes as either
being in favor of reversing (yk,j = 1) or aﬃrming (yk,j = 0) the decision of a lower court.6 A total
3

This focus on a uniﬁed structural model of voting and preference estimation is also found in Clinton et al. (2000).
One key tenet of the strategic approach is that justices may behave in a non-sincere fashion. If it is the case
justices are behaving strategically, their revealed preferences may not be the same as their sincere preferences. If
one believes the attitudinal model, our estimates could be viewed as true ideal points. If one believes the strategic
model, our estimates should be viewed as revealed preferences (which are likely to change over time due to strategic
considerations).
5
The unit of analysis is the case citation (ANALU=0). We select cases where DEC TYPE equals 1 or 5, and drop
all cases when VOTE equals 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, and 90. It would be possible to include unanimous decisions in our
analysis if one is willing to ﬁx a priori the discrimination and diﬃculty parameters for these cases.
6
We use the disposition variable DIS in the Supreme Court Date Base to code aﬃrmances and reversals. An
aﬃrmance (DIS=1) or a certiﬁcation to a lower court (DIS=9) are coded as aﬃrmances. Cases that are coded as
reversed (DIS=2), reversed and remanded (DIS=3), vacated and remanded (DIS=4), ﬁve plus remanded (DIS=6),
vacated (DIS=7), or petition denied or appeal dismissed (DIS=8) are coded as reversals.
4

7

of 2018 lower court cases were reversed, while 1162 were aﬃrmed. Using the disposition variable
in the Supreme Court Database, we are able to ﬂip the vote variables to form the data matrix.
The data matrix thus contains zeros, ones, and missing values (in fact, most of the data matrix is
missing data, as only nine justices sit on the Court in a given term). As discussed below, we use
data augmentation to deal with missing data.

3.1

The Attitudinal Model Formalized

Let Kt ⊂ {1, 2, . . . , K} denote the set of cases heard in term t. Similarly, let Jk ⊂ {1, 2, . . . , J}
denote the set of justices who heard case k. We are interested in modeling the decisions made
in terms t = 1, . . . , T on cases k ∈ Kt by justices j ∈ Jk in a D-dimensional issue space.7 Our
assumption is that each justice’s vote is an expressive action and depends only on the value the
justice attaches to the policy positions of the status quo and the policy alternative. Put another
way, a justice will vote to aﬃrm the decision of the lower court if the utility the justice attaches to
the status quo is greater than the utility the justice attaches to the alternative, regardless of the
expected actions of the other actors.
To operationalize this model, we begin by writing down random utility functions. Let
(a)

(a)

(a)

uk,j = −θ j − xk 2 + δk,j

be the utility to justice j ∈ Jk of voting to aﬃrm on case k ∈ Kt in term t, and
(r)

(r)

(r)

uk,j = −θ j − xk 2 + δk,j

be the utility to justice j ∈ Jk of voting to reverse on case k ∈ Kt in term t. θ j is justice j’s
ideal point in the D-dimensional issue space. Note that we assume that each justice’s ideal point
(a)

is constant across terms. We thus call this model the “constant ideal point model.” xk

is the

(r)

location of the policy under an aﬃrmance vote, xk is the location of the policy under a reversal,
(a)

(r)

and δk,j and δk,j are Gaussian disturbances with zero mean and variances τa2 and τr2 respectively.
7

We derive the model for a D-dimensional issue space, although we only present results for the one-dimensional
case (D = 1). For examples of multi-dimensional models, see Martin and Quinn (2001a) and Jackman (2001).

8

(r)

(a)

Given this spatial model, justice j will vote to reverse on case k when uk,j > uk,j or equivalently
(r)

(a)

(r)

(a)

when uk,j − uk,j > 0. Let zk,j be the diﬀerence between uk,j and uk,j . We can write and simplify
this utility diﬀerence zk,j as follows:8
(r)

(a)

(r)

(r)

(a)

(a)

zk,j = uk,j − uk,j = −θ j − xk 2 + δk,j + θ j − Xk 2 − δk,j


 

 

(r) 
(r)
(r)
(a) 
(a)
(a)
= − θ j − xk
θ j − xk + δk,j + θ j − xk
θ j − xk − δk,j
 (r)

 (a)

= −θ j θ j + 2θ j xk − xk xk + δk,j + θ j θ j − 2θ j xk + xk xk − δk,j
 


 

 (r) (r)
(a) (a)
(r)
(a)
(r)
(a)
= xk xk − xk xk + 2θ j xk − xk + δk,j − δk,j
(r)

(r)

(r)

(a)

(a)

(a)

(1)

= αk + βk θ j + εk,j
Here αk is a scalar, β k is a D × 1 column vector, and θ j is a D × 1 column vector. Given this
model, justice j will vote to aﬃrm on case k when zk,j > 0.

3.2

A Multi-Dimensional Item Response Model

The process of translating the spatial voting model above (presented in Equation 1) into a statistical
model begins by noting the relationship between the spatial voting model and our observed data.
For observed votes, we assume that:

yk,j =

1 if zk,j > 0
0 if zk,j ≤ 0

(2)

Where:
zk,j = αk + β k θ j + εk,j

iid

εk,j ∼ N (0, 1).

(3)

Note that we have ﬁxed the variance of εk,j to one since this variance and the other model parameters
are not separately identiﬁed in the likelihood. This is a typical assumption; e.g., one makes this
assumption for the standard probit model for a dichotomous dependent variable.
To form a probability model, we assume that:
iid

yk,j |αk , βk , θj ∼ Bernoulli(πk,j ).
8

Clinton et al. (2000) derive the same expression in the context of a model of legislative voting and go on to show
the link with standard item response models.

9

Taken together, Equations 2 and 3 imply that πk,j = Φ(αk + β k θ j ) where Φ(·) is the standard
normal cumulative distribution function. Thus, the sampling density of the observed data is:
f (Y|α, β, θ) ∝

T  


1−yk,j

Φ(αk + β k θ j )yk,j 1 − Φ(αk + βk θ j )

t=1 k∈Kt j∈Jk

We must deﬁne some additional notation to present our estimation strategy. Letα denote the
stacked αk ∀ k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K}, β to denote the stacked β k ∀ k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K}, and θ denote
the stacked θ j ∀ j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , J}. Bayesian inference for the justices’ ideal points θ and the case
parameters α and the β proceeds by summarizing the posterior density given by:
p(α, β, θ|Y) ∝ f (Y|α, β, θ)p(α, β, θ)
where p(α, β, θ) represent our prior beliefs about these parameters.

3.3

Identiﬁcation and Prior Distributions

It is well known that item response models suﬀer from identiﬁcation problems (see, for example,
Albert, 1992; Johnson and Albert, 1999). The ﬁrst problem is called scale invariance. The parameters of interest α, β, and θ are identiﬁed only up to an arbitrary scale factor. Thus, one must
anchor the scale on which ideal points are measured, just like one would ﬁx a scale to measure any
quantity. In the Bayesian context, one typically ﬁxes the scale invariance problem by assuming a
proper probability density function for the bliss points θ. The standard prior distribution for the
iid

ideal points is to assume θ j ∼ N (t0 , T0 ) for all justices j = 1, . . . , J. We assume independent
standard Normal priors on the ideal points (t0 = 0 and T0 = ID ). For an alternative informative
prior based on the ordering of the justices, see Martin and Quinn (2001a).
An additional identiﬁcation problem is called rotational invariance. For the one-dimensional
case under consideration (D = 1), multiplying all of the model parameters by negative one would
not change the value of the likelihood function. Substantively, the model cannot determine what
direction is liberal or conservative; i.e., should William Rehnquist be given a large positive or large
negative score? We also remedy this problem by using prior distributions. We assign zero prior

10

probability that Marshall falls above zero, which forces us to estimate a conservatism measure, and
thus ﬁxes rotational invariance.9
So far we have discussed prior distributions for the bliss points θ, but it is also necessary to
assign prior probabilities to the α and β parameters. The standard approach is to assume that
these are drawn from normal distributions. In other words:


αk
∼ ND+1 (b0 , B0 ) ∀ k ∈ {1, . . . , K}
βk
In most applications, estimating these parameters is straightforward when there are many actors under study (whether students in the educational testing literature, or legislators in political
science). However, when studying the Supreme Court, it becomes clear that estimating these parameters will be quite diﬃcult because only nine justices vote on each case. For each case, we must
estimate (D + 1) case-speciﬁc parameters using essentially a probit model with nine observations.
Our experience demonstrates that reliably estimating these parameters, using either frequentist
or Bayesian methods, is impossible without additional information. For remedies to this ‘microcommittee problem’ for cross-sectional data, see Martin and Quinn (2001a). This problem is not
unique to studying the Supreme Court. Londregan (2000b) studies legislative committees in Chile,
and uses information about the agenda process to solve the problem.
We are interested in the posterior density of the standard item response model, which simpliﬁes
to the following given the priors above:
p(θ, α, β|Y) ∝ f (Y|α, β, θ)p(θ)p(α,

 β)
1−yk,j 

	
	T 	
×
∝ t=1 k∈Kt j∈Jk Φ(αk + βk θ j )yk,j 1 − Φ(αk + β k θ j )
	J
	K
k=1 p(ηk )
j=1 p(θj )

(4)

For η k = (αk βk ) . As will become more apparent below, it will be useful to reexpress Equation 4
as:

p(θ, α, β|Y) = p(Z, θ, α, β|Y)dZ
 	T 	
	K
	J
	
=
t=1
k=1 p(ηk )
j=1 p(θj )dZ
k∈Kt
j∈Jk {fN (zk,j |µk,j , 1)I(zk,j , yk,j )}
9

Londregan (2000a) discusses an additional identiﬁcation problem relating to likelihood based inference. Due to
granularity of the voting data, estimates of the ideal points and case parameters are not jointly likelihood-identiﬁed.
This problem does not plague the Bayesian approach due to the imposition of a prior distribution.

11

Where µk,j = αk + β k θ j , and I(a, b) is an indicator function equal to 1 when a > 0 and b = 1,
or when a < 0 and b = 0, or when b is unobserved, and is equal to 0 otherwise. As we will see
below, conditioning on the latent utility diﬀerences allows us to recast the item response model for
a dichotomous response variable as a factor analysis model for a (latent) continuous response. The
integration over Z is easily accomplished in the simulation methods we employ by sampling from
the joint posterior distribution p(Z, θ, α, β), and then ignoring the draws of Z (Albert and Chib,
1993; Johnson and Albert, 1999).

3.4

Markov chain Monte Carlo for the Constant Ideal Point Model

The Gibbs sampling algorithm for this item response model contains three conditional distributions
from which we iteratively sample. All of them take standard forms. To aid in exposition, we need
to deﬁne two additional quantities. First, let θ ∗j = (1 θ j ) denote a (D + 1) × 1 column vector
that contains a constant followed by the ideal point estimate. Second, we deﬁne θ ∗ to be the
J × (D + 1) matrix formed by stacking the transpose of these elements for all j. The full conditional
distributions are:
1. f (Z|Y, θ, η). For terms t = 1, 2, . . . , T , cases k ∈ Kt, and justices j ∈ Jk , we simulate the
latent utilities from the following distribution:


if yk,j = 1
 N[0,∞) (αk + β k θ j , 1)
N(−∞,0] (αk + βk θ j , 1) if yk,j = 0
f (zk,j |yk,j , θ j , αk , βk ) =

if yk,j is unobserved
N (αk + βk θ j , 1)
N[a,b] denotes the Gaussian distribution truncated on the interval [a, b]. This is the standard
set-up for estimating a probit model with missing data from Albert and Chib (1993) [see also
Johnson and Albert, 1999].
2. f (η|Y, Z, θ). For all cases k ∈ Kt we simulate the case-speciﬁc parameters η k from a (D + 1)variate Normal distribution:
f (ηk |Y, Z, θ) = ND+1 (e, E)

12

 

 
−1
−1
∗ ∗
Where e = E θ ∗ zk,· + B−1
b
θ
+
B
, and zk,· is the column vector of latent
,
E
=
θ
0
0
0
utilities for all justices on case k.
3. f (θ|Y, Z, η). For all justices j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , J} we simulate their ideal point from a D-variate
Normal distribution:
f (θ j |Y, Z, η) = ND (t, T)


−1

t
, and z·,j is a (1 × K) row vector of
, T = β β + T0
Where t = T β (α − z·,j ) + T−1
0
0
latent utilities of member j across all cases and terms.
One iterates a large number of times from these conditional distributions, using draws from the
previous conditionals as updating values. This is a generalization of the Albert (1992) and Johnson
and Albert (1999) algorithms to a D-dimensional issue space (see also Clinton et al., 2000; Jackman,
2001).10 This algorithm requires a substantial amount of looping. In fact, for each iteration of the
sampler Step 1 requires 93090 draws, Step 2 requires 3210 draws, and Step 3 requires 29 draws.
We thus cannot rely on an interpreted language to estimate the model. This model, and all other
models presented in this paper, are estimated in C++ using the Scythe Statistical Library (Martin
and Quinn, 2001b).

3.5

Results for the Constant Ideal Point Model

We summarize the posterior densities of the ideal points θ j in Table 1.11 The ﬁrst two columns
of the table contain the posterior means and posterior medians for the justices. In nearly all cases
these are the same. It is worth noting that the scale ranges from Douglas – a notorious liberal –
on the far left (-6.513) to Clarence Thomas on the far right (3.909). Prima facie these results are
sensible; Marshall, Warren, Brennan, and Fortas are on the left, Harlan, Burger, Rehnquist, and
Scalia are on the far right. The posterior standard deviations in the third column can be thought
of like standard errors in the classical setting. For the most part, these standard deviations are
10

Patz and Junker (1999) develop a similar algorithm for a one-dimensional model with a logit link function.
These models were run for 200,000 Gibbs scans after 5000 burn-in scans. Standard diagnostics performed on the
posterior samples suggests that the chain has reached steady state.
11

13

quite small compared to the scale on which the justices are placed. Moderates are estimated with
the greatest precision (such as Stewart, Clark, O’Connor, and Souter), while for extremists the
estimates are somewhat less precise. This is intuitive, as it is much easier to discriminate those
at the middle of the ideological spectrum. The ﬁnal two columns of the table contain the 95%
Bayesian credible intervals for the ideal points, again illustrating the precision which with they are
estimated.
How does this measure compare to existing measures of judicial preferences? We ﬁrst correlate
our measure with the percent conservative voting on civil rights, civil liberties, economics, and
federalism cases across a justices’ career (these measures, as well as the percent liberalism scores
below, are taken from Epstein et al., 2001). This is in the spirit of the methodological audit of
Epstein and Mershon (1996). The results are quite interesting: the posterior means correlate with
these issue areas at -0.86, -0.84, -0.73, and -0.52 respectively (J = 29). These clearly out-perform
the scores of Segal and Cover (1989), which correlate at 0.63, 0.60, 0.43, 0.33 (J = 29). If one is
willing to assume that ideal points are constant across time, employing these posterior means or
medians as measures would be appropriate, although it would be vital to at least average over the
a posteriori uncertainty of the measures, and ideally write down a full structural model and treat
ideal points as latent data (Clinton et al., 2000). The measure also correlates highly with Schubert’s
(1974) C-scale (0.74) and E-scale (0.58) [J = 17], and Rohde and Spaeth’s (1976) freedom (-0.81),
equality (-0.75), and New Deal (-0.85) scales [J = 18].
One advantage of performing Bayesian inference is that it is straightforward to summarize
the posterior density of quantities of interest other than the parameters. One quantity of great
substantive importance is the location of the median justice. We began by asking: Which justice is
the over-all median justice from 1953-1999? Conditional on the constant ideal point model being
true, there is a 50.6% chance that White is the median justice, and a 47.1% chance that Stewart
is the median justice. Five other justices have non-zero posterior probabilities of being the over-all
median: Clark, Reed, Minton, Jackson, and Souter.
14

The real quantity of interest, though, is the term-by-term median of the Court. These are
valuable not only to study the policy outputs of the Court and bargaining on the Court, but also
how the Court might relate to other institutions in the separation of powers system. In Figures 1
and 2 we display the estimated posterior probability that each justice is the median justice in a
given term. Since the ideal points are constant, the median will only change when there is personnel
change on the Court. At the beginning of our study Minton has the highest probability of being
the median justice, who is followed by Clark, who is the median justice up until 1962, when Black
becomes the median. Interestingly, by the mid-1960s, Chief Justice Earl Warren is the median
justice. This changes in 1970, when White becomes the median justice with probability around
55% from 1970 to 1980, and then over 90% from 1980 to 1990. Throughout the 1990’s, O’Connor
or Kennedy are most likely to be the median justice. If one is willing to make the assumption
that preferences are indeed constant, these results should be very compelling. We question this
assumption, however, and now turn to results for models that allow ideal points to change over
time.

4

Independent Ideal Point Model

The model ﬁt in the previous section presumes that each justices’ ideal point θ j is constant throughout their career on the high bench. This is a very strict assumption, and as suggested by Epstein
et al. (1998), Baum (1988), and Ulmer (1981), may be entirely inappropriate. One alternative is to
assume that a justices’ ideal point θ j are independent and identically distributed across the course
of their careers. Substantively this is a bit troubling, as it in essence implies that judges have no
memory about their past behavior, and that their current behavior does not in any way depend on
the past. However, this independent ideal point model serves as a baseline for our ﬁnal two models.

4.1

A Modiﬁed Gibbs Sampling Algorithm

This model is essentially the same as the constant ideal point model except for the fact that the
θ j are indexed by time θ t,j . Our goal is now to estimate an ideal point for each term in which a

15

iid

particular justice served. We again assume Normal priors for the ideal points: θ t,j ∼ N (t0,t, T0,t)
(t0,t = 0 ∀ t and T0,t = ID ∀ t). One could just as easily employ informative Gaussian priors on
the ideal points, such as having diﬀerent prior means for each justice. To estimate these additional
parameters we only have to change the MCMC algorithm above in some minor ways. In Step 1,
one has to merely substitute θ t,j for θ j in the update. In Step 2, one stacks θ t,j into a term-speciﬁc
θ ∗t , which are employed in the updates. To complete the sampler, Step 3 requires simulating the
θ t,j term-by-term. The conditional distribution is:
f (θ t,j |Y, Z, η) = ND (t, T)


−1

t
and T = β t βt + T0,t . Note that zt,·,j contains the
Where t = T βt (αt − zt,·,j ) + T−1
0,t
0,t
stacked utilities for all cases in term t for justice j, and αt and βt contain the stacked case parameters
in term t.

4.2

Results from the Independent Ideal Point Model

We summarize the posterior densities of the θ t,j in Figures 3 and 4. For each justice, the thick, dark
line denotes the posterior mean, and the light lines ± 2 posterior standard deviations.12 What is
immediately apparent in these ﬁgures is that the term-to-term changes for a particular justice are
quite small. If it were the case that ideal points were in fact independent and identically distributed,
we would expect there to be some large term-to-term ﬂuctuations. The implication is that there is
a persistent component to these ideal points that should be modeled to get better estimates, not
only of the ideal points, but also case parameters and other quantities of interest.
We do see some interesting trending in these plots. Harlan seems to get more conservative
toward the middle of his career, and then becomes moderate. Marshall trends more and more
toward liberal throughout his career, as does Blackmun (a Nixon appointee who by the time he
retired was one of the most liberal justices on the high bench). Stevens and Souter also look to
become more liberal after 1990, after President Bush bolstered the conservative wing with the
12
This model was run for 200,000 scans after 5000 burn-in scans. Standard convergence tests suggest that the chain
has reached steady state.

16

appointment of Clarence Thomas. Consistent with the ﬁndings of Ulmer (1973) and Atkins and
Sloope (1986), Black seems to trend toward conservatism. Douglas, however, does not appear to
become more liberal over time (c.f., Ulmer, 1981). These ﬁgures suggest that for at least some
justices, ideal points change substantially over time. However, the statistical assumptions on which
this model is based are faulty, and we must turn to a modeling strategy that allows for persistence.

5

Dynamic Ideal Point Model

Assuming that each a justice’s ideal point at time t is independent of her ideal point at t − 1 is
clearly problematic. And, as demonstrated in the previous section, leads to rather unsatisfactory
estimates of the ideal points of the justices. A much better substantive assumption is that the ideal
points follow a random walk process. This strikes a balance between the overly strong assumptions
of both the constant ideal point model and the independent ideal point model, and allows for
a wide range of temporal patterns. In this section, we propose such a model that uses a statespace representation to model the temporal evolution of the ideal points. We employ the forward
ﬁltering, backward sampling algorithm of Carter and Kohn (1994) and Fr¨
uhwirth-Schnatter (1994)
[also discussed in West and Harrison (1997), Section 15.2.3] to estimate the ideal points.13
This model begins with the same latent utility speciﬁcation:14
zt,k,j = αk + βk θt,j + εt,k,j

iid

εt,k,j ∼ N (0, 1)

We adopt the standard multivariate normal prior over the case-speciﬁc parameters:


αk
βk


∼ N2 (0, I) ∀ k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K}

The model diﬀers in the structure of the prior on θt,j . For time period zero (which is unobserved),
we assume that:
θ0,j ∼ N (s0,j , S0,j )
13

For an excellent introduction to time series and dynamic modeling in the Bayesian context we recommend West
and Harrison (1997). Chapters 2-4 contain a discussion of dynamic linear models (DLMs). Chapter 15 presents
MCMC algorithms for DLMs. Our exposition here follows their account closely.
14
Here we restrict ourselves to the D = 1 case for concreteness. Since the usual dynamic linear model DLM results
apply equally to scalar and vector state variables (West and Harrison, 1997), it is easy to re-specify and ﬁt the
following model for the D > 1 case.

17

We model the dynamics of the ideal points with a separate random walk prior for each justice:
θt,j ∼ N (θt−1,j , σθ2t,j ) for t = T j , . . . , T j and justice j on the Court
T j is the ﬁrst term justice j served, and T j is the last term j served. We do not estimate ideal
points for terms in which a justice did not serve. sj,0 is set equal to 0 for all justices except:
Harlan, Douglas, Marshall, Brennan, Frankfurter, Fortas, Rehnquist, Scalia, and Thomas. Their
prior means at time zero were set to 1, -3, -2, -2, 1, -1, 2, 2.5, and 2.5 respectively. S0,j was set
to 1 for all justices except the aforementioned nine. Their prior variances at time zero were set to
0.1. These informative priors were used to identify the model, thus ameliorating both the scale and
rotational invariance problems. σθ2t,j was set equal to 0.1 for all justices except Douglas. Because
of the small number of cases that Douglas heard towards the end of his career, it was necessary to
use a more informative value of σθ2t,j = 0.001 to help identify his sequence of ideal points.

5.1

Estimation of Dynamic Ideal Points via MCMC

Estimating this model is also a straightforward application of the Gibbs sampling algorithm. The
ﬁrst two conditional distributions are precisely the same as those for the independent ideal point
model. The only update that changes is that for the θt,j . Here we employ a state-space representation and use the forward ﬁltering, backward sampling algorithm of Carter and Kohn (1994) and
Fr¨
uhwirth-Schnatter (1994) to sample from f (θ ·,j |α, β, Z), where θ ·,j now represents the vector
of j’s ideal points over his/her career (recall that we are estimating a one-dimensional dynamic
model). Let Θj = {θ 0,j , θT j ,j , θT j +1,j , . . . , θT j ,j }. Further, let Dt denote all information available
at time t. Given the assumed Markov dependence in the prior for θ ·,j is easy to show that the full
conditional posterior density for Θj given Dt can be decomposed as follows:
p(Θj |Dt) = p(θ T j ,j |DT j )p(θT j −1,j |θT j ,j , DT j −1 ) · · · p(θT j ,j |θ T j +1,j , DT j )p(θ0,j |θ T j ,j , D0 )
This forms the basis of the forward ﬁltering, backward sampling sampling algorithm. In this
context, this amounts to a three step process for each justice.

18

1. For t = T j , . . . , T j calculate the quantities at , Rt, st, St.
2. Sample θT j ,j from N (sT j ,j , ST j ,j ).
3. For t = (T j − 1), (T j − 2), . . . , T j sample θt,j from N (ht , Ht).
In the forward ﬁltering stage of the algorithm (Step 1), it is necessary to compute the following
quantities. First is at, which is the prior mean of θt,j given the information available at time t − 1,
and Rt which is the prior variance of θt,j given the information available at time t − 1. These
quantities are deﬁned as:
at = st−1
Rt = St−1 + σθ2t,j
Next is st , which is the posterior mean of θt,j given the information available at time t (not
the marginal mean given all the data), and St , which is the posterior variance of θt,j given the
information available at time t (not the marginal variance given all the data). These quantities are
deﬁned as:
st = at + Atet
St = Rt − AtQt At

Where At = Rtβ k Q−1
t , et = zt,·,j − αk − β k at , and Qt = β k Rt β k + I. Step 2 of the algorithm is

just a draw using the quantities above.
Step 3 of the algorithm is the backward sampling part of the algorithm. Using the quantities
computed above, we sample down from t = T j − 1 to t = T j , backwards through the justices’
career. The mean and variance for the Normal update is:
ht = st + Bt (θt+1,j − at+1 )
Ht = St − Bt2 Rt+1

19

Where Bt = St R−1
t+1 , the the posterior variance of θt,j given the information available at time t
divided by its prior variance given the information available at time t − 1. The beneﬁt of this
algorithm over more direct Gibbs sampling approaches is that it allows us to sample Θj directly
in one piece rather than sampling component by component. Given the generally high correlations
between the components of Θj (which is why we are ﬁtting this dynamic model to begin with),
component by component approaches mix very slowly. This algorithm is even more computationally
intensive than that in the previous section, as for each scan of the sampler we use this forward
ﬁltering, backward sampling approach for each justice.

5.2

Results from the Dynamic Ideal Point Model

We now turn to the results for the dynamic ideal point model.15 In Figures 5 and 6 we summarize
the posterior densities of the justices’ ideal points throughout their careers. Again the thick, dark
line represents the posterior mean, and the light lines are ± 2 posterior standard deviations away
from the posterior mean. The most striking diﬀerence between these results and those for the
independent ideal point model is that the trajectories are smoother. This, of course, is a result
of the random walk process used to model the ideal points. Again we see some trending. Harlan
again follows a parabolic trajectory. Black, Scalia, and Thomas trend towards conservatism, while
Marshall, Brennan, Blackmun, Stevens, and Souter trend towards liberalism. Again Blackmun is
the most striking example, beginning well right of center and retiring well left of center. It seems
that Epstein et al. (1998) are correct in their conclusion that some justices are moving over time,
although these results suggest that the number of justices with non-constant ideal points is not
nearly as great as they conclude.
How does this measure fare against the Epstein and Mershon (1996) validity test? In short,
very well. We present the term-by-term correlations between the posterior mean ideal points
from the dynamic model with percent conservative decisions in Figure 9. To make the ﬁndings
15

This model was run for 100,000 iterations after 5000 burn-in iterations. Standard convergence tests suggest that
the chain has reached steady state.

20

consistent with Epstein and Mershon (1996), the term-by-term measures are correlated with the
percent conservative decisions for the entire justices’ career. This is quite sensible, as term-by-term
percentages are often based on a very small number of cases. Looking across the cells it is clear
that the model does exceedingly well, particularly for civil liberties and civil rights case. It also
does quite well in economics cases, which is the major weakness of the Segal and Cover scores
(1989). It also does well in federalism cases except for a few terms around 1970, and throughout
the 1990s. This is suggestive of perhaps a second issue dimension that structures decision making
in federalism cases during this time period. Not coincidentally, these are both time periods when
“new federalism” was being considered in the executive and legislative branches respectively. When
comparing these correlations with those from the constant model, it is clear that the dynamic model
does a superior job.
For the dynamic ideal point model we also explore the identity of the median justice in each
term. These posterior probabilities are presented in Figures 7 and 8. Frankfurter is the median
justice in 1953, followed by Clark, then Stewart, then Goldberg, then Black. Brennan is likely the
median in a handful of terms in the 1960s. From the late 1960s to the early 1990s, White is the
median justice in a good number of terms, although Stewart, Blackmun, and Powell are medians in
certain terms. Finally, in the 1990s, O’Connor and Kennedy again appear to be the median justice,
except for the 1989 term when it is likely Souter.
The identity of the median justice is interesting, but so too is the location of the median on
the estimated issue dimension. In Figure 10 we summarize the posterior density of the location of
the median justice in each term. During the early Warren Courts, until 1961 when White joined
the Court, the median is quite conservative. This changed in the 1962 term, with the addition of
Goldberg, and later on in the decade Fortas and Marshall. There is a break from liberalism in the
1969 term, when Nixon nominated Burger to replace Warren. With that nomination, and then the
nomination of Blackmun in 1970, and Powell and Rehnquist in in 1971, the Court became quite
conservative. It trended toward a more moderate position, but that changed with the O’Connor
21

appointment by President Reagan. The Court became more conservative during the late Reagan
years, grew somewhat more moderate during the Bush administration, and then became somewhat
more conservative during the Clinton years. The most conservative Court sat in the 1988 term.
The most liberal sat in 1967. On face, these results are quite compelling. Perhaps it is the case,
though, the agenda changes over time account not only for the trends in justices’ ideal points, but
also in the location of the median justice. In the following section we model the case parameters
over time to not only study the content of the cases reaching the Court, but also to see if controlling
for them impacts the inferences we draw about the ideal points of the justices.

6

Dynamic Ideal Point and Case Parameter Model

The results from the previous section are quite interesting. Many justices seem to be trending
over time. But perhaps this is an artifact of the types of cases that are being heard by the Court
rather than true preference change. The results above are conditioned on the fact that the αk and
β k case parameters are a priori independent and identically distributed from standard Normal
distributions. Just as this assumption was problematic for the ideal points, it is also troublesome
for the case parameters. Additionally, we have information available to us – the federal circuit from
which the case originated – that we can employ to better model these parameters.
Recall that the utility diﬀerence between a reversal vote and an aﬃrmative vote for justice j
on case k in term t can be written as:
(r)

(a)

zt,k,j = ut,k,j − ut,k,j





(a) (a)
(r) (r)
(r)
(a)
= xt,k xt,k − xt,k xt,k + 2θ t,j xt,k − xt,k + ,t,k,j
(r)

(a)

While the xt,k and the xt,k parameters are not identiﬁed in the likelihood, they can be identiﬁed
in the posterior if informative priors are used for these parameters as well as the ideal points. This
is the approach we employ here. As in the previous section, we assume independent random walk
priors for the ideal points:
θt,j ∼ N (θt−1,j , σθ2t,j )
Where σθ2t,j is assumed known for all j, t. Just as before, we assume θ0,j ∼ N (s0,j , S0,j )
22

Instead of assuming priors over the case-speciﬁc parameters (αk and β k ), we now parameterize
the prior in terms of the aﬃrm and reversal points. For the policy positions under aﬃrmance, we
assume:
(a)

xt,· |γ t ∼ N (Ctγ t , σx2(a) I)
And:
γ t ∼ N (γ t−1 , Σ t )
(a)

(a)

Where xt,· is the vector of stacked xt,k ∀k ∈ Kt, and Ct is a matrix of dummy variables indicating
the originating lower court for each case in term t.16 γ t is a coeﬃcient vector that estimates the
mean position of the cases originating from each court of origin, σx2(a) is the prior variance of each
(a)

xt,k , and Σ t is the prior variance covariance matrix of γ t . We assume that σx2(a) and Σ t are
known a priori. We also assume that γ 0 ∼ N (g0 , G0 ). This prior allows us to estimate the mean
location of the policy proposals made by each circuit court.
(r)

For the reversal point xt,k , we assume a hierarchical prior that depends on the ideal point of
the reversal opinion writer (if known):
(r)
xt,k


N (θt,wk , σx2(r) )
∼
N (0, σx2(r) )

if opinion writer known
if opinion writer not known
(r)

(r)

Where wk is the index of the justice who wrote xt,k and σx2(r) is the prior variance of xt,k which
is assumed known. What this prior is saying substantively is that if the opinion writer is known,
the reversal opinion likely resides near her ideal point. When the majority of the Court reverses
an opinion of a lower Court, Spaeth (1999) codes the majority opinion writer. In the cases when
the Court aﬃrms, the opinion writer supporting the reversal position is not known, so we assume
a priori that the reversal point has mean zero and variance σx2(r) .
16

We cull these covariates from the Supreme Court Database. We assume that political geography matters, and
thus cases the originate in lower federal courts or state courts in the twelve federal circuits are similar. This is a
reasonable assumption: cases from lower courts in Texas or the Texas Supreme Court are likely to look like those from
the Appeals Court of the Fifth Circuit. We thus employ the SOURCE variable from the Supreme Court Data Base,
and use it to create thirteen dummy variables: one for each of the eleven circuits (note that the Eleventh Circuit was
established in October, 1981 when the Fifth Circuit was split). The twelfth variable represents the DC circuit. Other
miscellaneous federal courts, cases that arose under original jurisdiction, etc. comprise the ﬁnal category (there is no
constant term).

23

6.1

Conditional Distributions

Conditional on the latent utility diﬀerences Z, we can write the posterior density for this model as:
f (θ, x(a), x(r), γ|Z) ∝ f (Z|θ, x(a), x(r))f (x(a)|γ)f (γ)f (x(r)|θ)f (θ)
Where x(a) and x(r) denote the stacked aﬃrmance and reversal positions for all k respectively. The
full conditional densities are:

if yk,j,t = 1
 N[0,∞)(µt,k,j , 1)
(a) (r)
(µ
, 1) if yk,j,t = 0
N
p(zt,k,j |θ, x , x , γ) =
 (−∞,0] t,k,j
if yk,j,t is unobserved
N (µt,k,j , 1)

(5)

p(γ|Z, θ, x(a), x(r)) ∝ p(x(a)|γ)p(γ)

(6)

p(θ|Z, γ, x(a), x(r)) ∝ f (Z|θ, x(a), x(r))p(x(r)|θ)p(θ)

(7)

p(x(a), x(r)|Z, γ, θ) ∝ f (Z|θ, x(a), x(r))p(x(a)|γ)p(x(r)|θ)

(8)

Where the mean




(a) (a)
(r) (r)
(r)
(a)
µt,k,j = xt,k xt,k − xt,k xt,k + 2θ t,j xt,k − xt,k
is now deﬁned as a function of the reversal and aﬃrmance points instead of the case-speciﬁc
parameters. The densities in Equation 5 are all easily simulated from (see the baseline constant
ideal point model). The density in Equation 6 is the product of a Gaussian density and a random
walk prior, and so can be simulated from using standard methods for dynamic linear models (now
with covariates), as discussed in the previous section (West and Harrison, 1997). The densities in
Equations 7 and 8 are nonstandard, and are best simulated from using Metropolis-Hastings steps.

6.2

Sampling Form p(θ|Z, γ, x(a), x(r))

The full conditional for θ ·,j is similar to the corresponding full conditional for the dynamic ideal
point model discussed in the previous section, except that now the term p(x(r)|θ) appears. This
additional term makes the resulting full conditional non-standard. As a result, the forward ﬁltering, backward sampling algorithm for sampling θ no longer applies directly. Instead, we use a
independent Metropolis-Hastings step [see Chib and Greenberg (1995), Robert and Casella (1999)].

24

To begin, note that the full conditional for justice j’s ideal points is independent of justice j  ’s
ideal points for all j and j  . This allows us to sample each justice’s ideal points independently of
one another. The target density for justice j is:
(r)

p(θ ·,j |z·,j , γ, x(a), x(r)) ∝ f (z·,j |θ·,j , x(a), x(r))p(xj |θ·,j )p(θ·,j ),
(r)

Where xj

(9)

denotes the reversal opinions that j authored.

The independent Metropolis-Hasting algorithm is implemented by sampling a candidate value
(can)

of θ ·,j (denoted θ j

(can)

) from a candidate generating density, q(θj

(cur)

). We let θ j

denote the

current value of θ ·,j . The candidate value is accepted with probability:

min

(can)

|z·,j , γ, x(a), x(r)) q(θj

(cur)

|z·,j , γ, x(a), x(r)) q(θ j

p(θ j

p(θ j

(cur)

)

(can)

)


, 1

(10)

Our choice of candidate generating density is the following:
(can)

q(θj

(can)

) ∝ f (zj |θj

(can)

, x(a), x(r))p(θj

)

(11)

Note that a candidate value can be sampled from this density using exactly the same forward
ﬁltering, backward sampling algorithm used in dynamic ideal point model in the previous section.
Substituting this choice of q(·) into Equation 10 reveals that the acceptance probability becomes:

min

6.3

p(xj |θ j

(r)

(can)

)

(r)

(cur)

)

p(xj |θ j


, 1

(12)

Sampling From p(x(a), x(r)|Z, γ, θ)
(a)

(r)

We use a random walk Metropolis step to sample from the full conditional distribution of {xk , xk }
given the other model parameters. The candidate generating density is a bivariate student-t density
(a)

(r)

centered at the current value of {xk , xk }. Given the latent zk,· , the target density is simply the
product Gaussian densities:
(a) (r)
p(xt,k , xt,k |zt,k , γ, θt,· )

∝

Jt


fN (zt,k,j |µt,k,j , 1)p(x(a)|γ)p(x(r)|θ t,·)

j=1

25

Where µt,k,j is deﬁne above, and θ t,· denotes the stacked θ t,j for all justices j. With the symmetric
candidate generating densities the Metropolis acceptance probability is:


 p(x(a)(can), x(r)(can)|zt,k , γ, θ t,·) 
t,k
t,k
min
, 1
 p(x(a)(cur), x(r)(cur)|zt,k , γ, θt,·) 
t,k

t,k

To estimate the full dynamic ideal point and case parameter model, we iteratively sample from
these three blocks along with the block for the latent utilities.

6.4

Results from the Dynamic Ideal Point and Case Parameter Model

We report the estimated ideal points for the justices in Figures 11 and 12.17 The prior probabilities
for the θ t,j are the same as those for the dynamic ideal point model above. We adopt an informative
prior over the mean locations of the circuits γ 0 at time t = 0. We base our priors on a conversation
with an expert on the federal appeals courts: Steve Van Winkle (SUNY Stony Brook). The most
liberal circuits are the 2nd, 1st, and 9th, with prior means -0.5, 0.0, and 0.5 respectively. The
DC circuit is assigned a prior mean of 0.6. The moderate circuits – the 6th, 7th, and 8th, all
are assigned prior means of 0.7. For the conservative circuits, the 10th is assigned mean 0.8, the
4th 1.0, the 3rd 1.1, and the 5th 1.4. The prior variance for these quantities is Σ 0 = 0.1 I.
In our dynamic speciﬁcation, we must only assign priors for the initial state – the rest of the
dynamics are determined by the data and the prior distribution at t = 0. Based on our conversation
with the expert, we further expect there to be a structural break in 1983. We model this by
assuming Σ 1983 = 0.1 I, while Σ t = 0.01 I for all other time periods. In essence this allows for a
discontinuity in the evolution of the circuit court means (the γ t s) to occur in 1983. This is allowing
for two years of percolation time from both the newly created 11th circuit (when the 5th was split
in October, 1981), and for the eﬀect of Reagan’s initial appointees. It is well known that President
Reagan was the ﬁrst president to aggressively screen judges for the lower bench, in eﬀect neglecting
the past norm of senatorial courtesy.18
17

This model was run for 200,000 iterations after 20,000 burn-in iterations. Standard convergence tests suggest that
the chain has reached steady state. This took approximately six days on a dedicated Pentium 933 Linux workstation
using compiled and optimized C++ code.
18
Due to time constraints we have not been able to adequately assess prior sensitivity for this model. We have,
(r)
(a)
however, ﬁt models in which the prior distribution of xk is uniform between xk and the ideal point of the justice

26

The results are quite striking. Again, many justices seem to trend over time. Just as with
the dynamic model discussed above, Harlan demonstrates a parabolic trajectory, Black trends to
conservatism, as does Frankfurter and Scalia. Many justices trend toward liberalism in both models:
Marshall, Brennan, Blackmun, Stevens, Souter, and Ginsburg. For the most part, these dynamics
mirror those of the dynamic ideal point model. This suggests that after controlling for case stimuli,
many the ideal points of justices do in fact trend over time. How do these results compare to Epstein
et al. (1998)? Of the seven justices they assert have constant preferences over time, our results
diﬀer for Brennan, Harlan, Marshall, and Stewart. Of the remaining nine that they conclude trend
over time, our results diﬀer for Clark, White, and Warren. It seems clear that without modeling
case-speciﬁc parameters and controlling for case stimuli, it is quite diﬃcult to ascertain whether or
not preferences change over time. Nonetheless, our major substantive conclusion agrees with that
of Epstein et al. (1998): preferences of many Supreme Court justices do in fact change over time.
It is interesting to look at the position of the median justice along the estimated dimension from
1953 to 1999 (the posterior probabilities that a particular justice is the median is substantively quite
similar to that in the previous section). We plot the posterior densities of the median justice in
Figure 13. The results here are quite interesting. The early Warren courts were, on an absolute
scale, the most conservative. The late Warren courts were the most liberal. The Burger and
Rehnquist courts were certainly more conservative than the Warren courts, but, particularly in
the 1990s, not as conservative as we might have expected (and which was suggested by the other
models). This is not entirely surprising, as either O’Connor (or perhaps Kennedy) is likely the
median justice. Further, many of the cases coming before the Court were decided by lower courts
in fairly moderate directions. This is another reason to dynamically model the case parameters
across time; to compare justices across time on an absolute scale, one has to control for temporal
changes in the inputs to the system.
It is also of interest to know where the lower federal courts are setting the status quo point for
(r)

who wrote xk . We have found the dynamics to be strikingly similar. This suggests that the data is in fact quite
informative, and thus the prior is not driving the inference.

27

the Supreme Court; i.e., the policy reversion if the Court votes to aﬃrm. We plot these posterior
densities in Figure 14. Again, the thick, dark line denotes the posterior mean, and the light lines
are ± 2 posterior standard deviations away from the posterior mean. Many of the circuits exhibit
a similar pattern: tending toward conservatism in the 1950s, becoming more liberal throughout
the 1960s and 1970s, and slowly returning to conservatism in the 1980s, and turning slightly more
liberal in the late 1990s. This pattern, which follows presidential politics quite well (with a time
lag), is apparent for the 1st (New England), 2nd (New York, Vermont, and Connecticut), 4th (the
mid-Atlantic states), 9th (the west coast), and DC circuits. Some circuits trend toward liberalism
until the early-to-mid 1980s, and then either level out or start becoming increasingly conservative.
The 3rd (Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware), the 5th (the deep South before 1981, and
Texas, Louisiana, and Mississippi thereafter), the 6th (the Midwest), the 8th (the plains states),
and the 10th (the Rocky Mountain states) follow this pattern. Overall, the 4th, 5th, 10th and 11th
circuits are most conservative. It is also worth noting that while imposing a structural break in
1983 a priori, there is little evidence of such a break in the data. One could argue that Reagan’s
disregard for Senatorial courtesy was either counter-balanced by the increasing liberalization of
society, or only manifested itself after a considerable time lag.

7

Discussion

The results from these four models are quite informative, and have taught us a great deal about the
Supreme Court. Some of the ﬁndings support those of previous research. Others are substantively
more unique. The most important substantive conclusion to draw is that the ideal points of Supreme
Court justices do change over time. This is not a universal phenomenon, but it is certainly the
case that the preferences of some justices change over time even when controlling for the types of
cases that come before the Court. This implies that a constant measure of judicial preferences –
such as the measure of Segal and Cover (1989) – is not appropriate for explaining longitudinal
judicial decision making. Our ﬁndings also demonstrate that the ﬁnal conclusion of Epstein et al.
(1998) that judicial preferences change is correct, but our results demonstrate that the identity of
28

the changing justices and the temporal patterns that they exhibit are very diﬀerent. In addition
to presenting posterior standard deviations (standard errors) for all measures, we also learned the
identity and the location of the median justice on the Court during each term. Finally, we learned
about the types of decisions that were selected out of each of the federal circuits by the Justices on
the Supreme Court.
We have also learned a great deal about the modeling strategies, in particular for dynamical
systems. First, it is clearly important to account for persistence, as the results of both dynamic
models illustrate. At a minimum, to understand how any social system works, it is vital to control
for diﬀerent inputs to the system. Since the Supreme Court is an appellate court, it is necessary
to control for the cases coming before it. Second, we have shown two advantages of adopting
a Bayesian approach: (a) we were able to incorporate prior information to not only identify a
statistical model, but also to bring additional information, such as the ideological predispositions
of the federal appeals courts, to bear on the problem of estimating judicial ideal points; (b) we
were able to estimate complex and ﬂexible models using Markov chain Monte Carlo methods.
Finally, we have demonstrated the beneﬁts of using a compiled language, such as C++, to estimate
computationally intensive, yet substantively meaningful models.
This research is only the ﬁrst step of a research agenda. Others might be tempted to use our
estimates as independent or dependent variables in other analyses. The better approach, which
we leave for future research, is to write down a full structural decision making model, treating
the ideal points as missing data. Such an approach is straightforward in a Bayesian context, and
conditional on the modeling assumptions being true, allows for one to test various theories of
decision making while also estimating the ideal points of the actor under study. Nonetheless, we
have provided estimates that we hope others will ﬁnd useful in their research. Another important
step is explaining the causes of the dynamics we observe. Why do justices’ ideal points change
over time? Is this some psychological process, or do revealed preferences change with diﬀerent
compositions of the Court, or perhaps because of separation of powers concerns? Why do the
29

circuits change ideologically? Is this simply due to replacement on the bench, or due to strategic
concerns about en banc or Supreme Court review? We can incorporate suitable covariates in the
statistical models to test for these explanations, or perhaps employ existing data about decision
making in the Federal Courts of Appeal. Finally, there is additional data that can be brought to
the problem. In particular, having data about the cert process would be quite informative about
not only the status quo and alternative points, but also how a minority of the Court goes about
setting the agenda. Such data is available in a limited form, but to date no comprehensive data
base of cert votes publicly available.

References
Albert, James H. 1992. “Bayesian Estimation of Normal Ogive Item Response Curves Using Gibbs
Sampling.” Journal of Educational Statistics 17(Fall):251–269.
Albert, James H., and Siddhartha Chib. 1993. “Bayesian Analysis of Binary and Polychotomous
Response Data.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 88(June):669–679.
Atkins, Burton M., and Terry Sloope. 1986. “The ‘New’ Hugo Black and the Warren Court.” Polity
18:621–637.
Bailey, Michael, and Kelly Chang. 2001. “Comparing Presidents, Senators, and Justices: Interinstitutional Preference Estimation.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, forthcoming
.
Baum, Lawrence. 1988. “Measure Policy Change in the United States Supreme Court.” American
Political Science Review 82(September):905–912.
Baum, Lawrence. 1992. “Membership Change and Collective Voting Change in the United States
Supreme Court.” Journal of Politics 54(February):3–24.
Carter, C. K., and R. Kohn. 1994. “One Gibbs Sampling for State-Space Models.” Biometrika
81(September):541–533.
Chib, Siddhartha, and Edward Greenberg. 1995. “Understanding the Metropolis-Hastings Algorithm.” The American Statistician 49(November):327–336.
Clinton, Joshua, Simon Jackman, and Douglas Rivers. 2000. “The Statistical Analysis of Legislative Behavior: A Uniﬁed Approach.” Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Political
Methodology Society.
Downs, Anthony. 1957. An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper & Row.
Enelow, James, and Melvin Hinich. 1984. The Spatial Theory of Voting: An Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Epstein, Lee, Valerie Hoekstra, Jeﬀrey A. Segal, and Harold J. Spaeth. 1998. “Do Political Preferences Change: A Longitudinal Study of U.S. Supreme Court Justices.” Journal of Politics
60(Augut):801–818.

30

Epstein, Lee, and Jack Knight. 1998. The Choices Justices Make. Washington, DC: CQ Press.
Epstein, Lee, and Carol Mershon. 1996. “Measuring Political Preferences.” American Journal of
Political Science 40(February):261–294.
Epstein, Lee, Jeﬀrey A. Segal, Harold J. Spaeth, and Thomas G. Walker. 2001. The Supreme Court
Compendium: Data, Decisions, and Developments, Second Edition. Washington, DC: CQ Press.
Epstein, Lee, Thomas G. Walker, and William J. Dixon. 1989. “The Supreme Court and Criminal Justice Disputes: A Neo-Institutional Perspective.” American Journal of Political Science
33(November):825–841.
Eskridge, William N. 1991. “Overriding Supreme Court Statutory Interpretation Decisions.” Yale
Law Journal 101(November):331–417.
Fr¨
uhwirth-Schnatter, Sylvia. 1994. “Data Augmentation and Dynamic Linear Models.” Journal of
Time Series Analysis 15:183–202.
Jackman, Simon. 2001. “Multidimensional Analysis of Roll Call Data via Bayesian Simulation:
Identiﬁcation, Estimation, Inference and Model Checking.” Political Analysis, forthcoming .
Johnson, Valen E., and James H. Albert. 1999. Ordinal Data Modeling. New York: Springer.
Londregan, John. 2000a.
8(Winter):35–56.

“Estimating Legislators’ Preferred Points.”

Political Analysis

Londregan, John. 2000b. Legislative Institutions and Ideology in Chile’s Democratic Transition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Martin, Andrew D., and Kevin M. Quinn. 2001a. “Estimating Latent Structures of Voting for
Micro-Committees, with Application to the U.S. Supreme Court.” Paper presented at the Annual
Meeting of the Midwest Political Science Association.
Martin, Andrew D., and Kevin M. Quinn. 2001b.
http://scythe.wustl.edu/.

“Scythe Statistical Library, Release 0.1.”

Patz, Richard J., and Brian W. Junker. 1999. “A Straightforward Approach to Markov Chain Monte
Carlo Methods for Item Response Models.” Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics
24(Summer):146–178.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal. 1991a. “Patterns of Congressional Voting.” American
Journal of Political Science 35(February):228–278.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll-Call
Voting. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Robert, Christian P., and George Casella. 1999. Monte Carlo Statistical Methods. New York:
Springer.
Rohde, David W., and Harold J. Spaeth. 1976. Supreme Court Decision Making. San Francisco:
W. H. Freeman.
Schubert, Glendon. 1959. Quantitative Analysis of Judicial Behavior . Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Schubert, Glendon. 1965. The Judicial Mind: The Attitudes and Ideologies of Supreme Court
Justices, 1946-1963 . Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

31

Schubert, Glendon. 1974. The Judicial Mind Revisited: Psychometric Analysis of Supreme Court
Ideology. London: Oxford University Press.
Segal, Jeﬀrey A., and Albert D. Cover. 1989. “Ideological Values and the Votes of U.S. Supreme
Court Justices.” American Political Science Review 83(June):557–565.
Segal, Jeﬀrey A., Lee Epstein, Charles M. Cameron, and Harold J. Spaeth. 1995. “Ideological Values
and the Votes of U.S. Supreme Court Justices Revisited.” Journal of Politics 57(August):812–
823.
Segal, Jeﬀrey A., and Harold J. Spaeth. 1989. “Decisional Trends on the Warren and Burger Courts:
Results from the Supreme Court Data Base Project.” Judicature 73(June-July):103–107.
Segal, Jeﬀrey A., and Harold J. Spaeth. 1993. The Supreme Court and the Attitudinal Model .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Spaeth, Harold J. 1990. “The Dimensions of Civil Liberties Decision Making on the Burger Court.”
In Studies in U. S. Supreme Court Behavior ( Harold J. Spaeth, and Saul Brenner, editors), New
York: Garland, pp. 184–194.
Spaeth, Harold J. 1999. United States Supreme Court Judicial Database, 1953-1998 Terms [Computer File] . Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research, 15th
edition.
Tate, C. Neal, and Roger Handberg. 1991. “Time Binding and Theory Building in Personal Attribute Models of Supreme Court Voting Behavior, 1916-88.” American Journal of Political
Science 35(May):460–480.
Ulmer, S. Sidney. 1973. “The Longitudinal Behavior of Hugo Lafayette Black: Parabolic Support
for Civil Liberties, 1937-1971.” Florida State University Law Review 1.
Ulmer, S. Sidney. 1981. “Parabolic Support of Civil Liberties Claims: The Case of William O.
Douglas.” In Courts, Law, and Judicial Processes ( S. Sidney Ulmer, editor), New York: Free
Press.
West, Mike, and Jeﬀ Harrison. 1997. Bayesian Forecasting and Dynamic Models. New York:
Springer.

32

Justice
Harlan
Black
Douglas
Stewart
Marshall
Brennan
White
Warren
Clark
Frankfurter
Whittaker
Burton
Reed
Fortas
Goldberg
Minton
Jackson
Burger
Blackmun
Powell
Rehnquist
Stevens
O’Connor
Scalia
Kennedy
Souter
Thomas
Ginsburg
Breyer

Post. Mean
1.545
-1.304
-6.513
0.403
-2.002
-1.643
0.407
-1.478
0.160
1.112
1.078
1.183
1.140
-1.609
-1.011
0.987
1.132
1.468
-0.073
0.809
2.914
-0.553
1.309
2.433
1.293
0.209
3.909
-0.227
-0.180

Post. Median
1.540
-1.303
-6.504
0.402
-1.998
-1.640
0.407
-1.476
0.159
1.108
1.073
1.178
1.129
-1.597
-1.005
0.979
1.090
1.466
-0.073
0.807
2.906
-0.552
1.309
2.422
1.289
0.209
3.888
-0.225
-0.179

Post. Std.
0.124
0.101
0.593
0.053
0.113
0.077
0.044
0.109
0.068
0.120
0.143
0.165
0.213
0.248
0.194
0.225
0.494
0.097
0.043
0.067
0.176
0.052
0.085
0.200
0.104
0.083
0.432
0.109
0.117

BCI
2.5% 97.5%
1.315 1.809
-1.510 -1.109
-7.691 -5.363
0.299 0.511
-2.231 -1.784
-1.797 -1.496
0.322 0.496
-1.696 -1.277
0.026 0.295
0.879 1.354
0.806 1.374
0.879 1.517
0.741 1.586
-2.134 -1.151
-1.414 -0.656
0.556 1.454
0.276 2.308
1.287 1.657
-0.157 0.009
0.679 0.943
2.582 3.277
-0.658 -0.453
1.145 1.475
2.071 2.848
1.103 1.507
0.048 0.367
3.105 4.781
-0.444 -0.016
-0.419 0.044

Table 1: Posterior density summary of ideal points of U.S. Supreme Court Justices, 1953-1999, for
the constant ideal point model.

33

1970

1980

1990

0.8
0.4
0.0

2000

1960

1970

1980

Marshall

Brennan

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Warren

Clark

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Whittaker

Burton

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Fortas

Goldberg

2000

1960

1970

1980

term

1990

2000

1990

2000

0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4

term

1990

0.8

Reed

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

1980

2000

0.4

2000

term

1970

1990

0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4

1990

0.8

Frankfurter

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

1980

2000

0.4

2000

term

1970

1990

0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8

1990

2000

0.8

White

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

1980

1990

0.4

2000

term

1970

2000

0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4

1970

1990

0.8

Stewart

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

0.0

1960

Pr(median justice)
1960

term

0.0

1960

0.8

2000

0.4

1960

0.4

Pr(median justice)
1990

Douglas

0.0

0.8
0.4

1980

0.0

Pr(median justice)

1960

Pr(median justice)

1970

0.0

Pr(median justice)

1960

Pr(median justice)

Black

0.0

Pr(median justice)

Harlan

1960

1970

1980

term

Figure 1: Estimated posterior probabilities that each justice in a given term is the median justice
on the Court for the constant ideal point model, Justices Harlan-Goldberg.
34

1970

1980

1990

0.8
0.4
0.0

2000

1960

1970

1980

Powell

Rehnquist

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

O’Connor

Scalia

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Souter

Thomas

2000

1960

1970

1980

Ginsburg

Breyer

1980

term

1990

2000

1990

2000

0.4

1960

1970

1980

term

0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4

1970

2000

0.8

term

Pr(median justice)

term

1990

0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4

1990

0.8

Kennedy

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

1980

2000

0.4

2000

term

1970

1990

0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8

1990

2000

0.8

Stevens

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

1980

1990

0.4

2000

term

1970

2000

0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4

1970

1990

0.8

Blackmun

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

0.0

1960

Pr(median justice)
1960

term

0.0

1960

0.8

2000

0.4

1960

0.4

Pr(median justice)
1990

Burger

0.0

0.8
0.4

1980

0.0

Pr(median justice)

1960

Pr(median justice)

1970

0.0

Pr(median justice)

1960

Pr(median justice)

Jackson

0.0

Pr(median justice)

Minton

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

term

Figure 2: Estimated posterior probabilities that each justice in a given term is the median justice
on the Court for the constant ideal point model, Justices Minton-Breyer.
35

2000

1980

1990

0 2 4
−4

2000

1960

1970

1980

Brennan

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

White

Warren

Clark

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

term

Frankfurter

Whittaker

Burton

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

term

Reed

Fortas

Goldberg

term

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

term

1990

2000

2000

1990

2000

−4

conservatism

−4

conservatism
1980

1990

0 2 4

term

0 2 4

term

1970

2000

−4

conservatism

conservatism
1990

−4

−4

1980

1990

0 2 4

term

0 2 4

term

1970

2000

−4

conservatism

−4

conservatism
1980

1990

0 2 4

term

0 2 4

term

0 2 4

term

1970

2000

−4

conservatism

−4

conservatism
1970

1990

0 2 4

Marshall
0 2 4

Stewart
0 2 4

term

−4

1960

1970

term

0 2 4

1960

conservatism
1960

term

0 2 4

1960

0 2 4

conservatism
1990

Douglas

−4

0 2 4

1980

−4

conservatism

1960

conservatism

1970

−4

conservatism

1960

conservatism

Black

−4

conservatism

Harlan

1960

1970

1980

term

Figure 3: Posterior density summary of the ideal points of each justice for the terms in which they
served for the independent ideal point model, Justices Harlan-Goldberg.
36

2000

1980

1990

0 2 4
−4

2000

1960

1970

1980

Rehnquist

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

Stevens

O’Connor

Scalia

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

term

Kennedy

Souter

Thomas

2000

1960

1970

1980

term

Ginsburg

Breyer

1980

term

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

term

−4

conservatism
1970

2000

0 2 4

term

1990

2000

−4

conservatism

conservatism
1990

−4

−4

1980

1990

0 2 4

term

0 2 4

term

1970

2000

−4

conservatism

−4

conservatism
1980

1990

0 2 4

term

0 2 4

term

0 2 4

term

1970

2000

−4

conservatism

−4

conservatism
1970

1990

0 2 4

Powell
0 2 4

Blackmun
0 2 4

term

−4

1960

1970

term

0 2 4

1960

conservatism
1960

term

0 2 4

1960

0 2 4

conservatism
1990

Burger

−4

0 2 4

1980

−4

conservatism

1960

conservatism

1970

−4

conservatism

1960

conservatism

Jackson

−4

conservatism

Minton

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

term

Figure 4: Posterior density summary of the ideal points of each justice for the terms in which they
served for the independent ideal point model, Justices Minton-Breyer.
37

1980

1990

2000

6
1980

1990

2000

1960

1980

Brennan

1980

1990

2000

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Clark

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Whittaker

Burton

2
−6

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

term

Reed

Fortas

Goldberg

1980

term

1990

2000

2
−6

−2

conservatism

2
−6

−2

conservatism

2
−2

6

term

6

term

1970

2000

−2

conservatism

2
−6

−2

conservatism

2
−2
−6

2000

1990

6

Frankfurter
6

term

1990

2000

2

2000

term

1980

1990

−6
1960

term

1970

2000

−2

conservatism

2
−6

−2

conservatism

2
−2

2000

1990

6

Warren
6

White
6

term

1990

2000

2

2000

term

1980

1990

−6
1960

term

1970

2000

−2

conservatism

2
−6

−2

conservatism

2
−2

1970

1990

6

Marshall
6

Stewart
6

term

−6

1960

1970

term

6

1960

2
−6

1970

term

6

1960

−2

conservatism
1960

−6

conservatism

2
−6

1970

−6

conservatism

1960

conservatism

−2

conservatism

2
−2
−6

conservatism

1960

conservatism

Douglas

6

Black

6

Harlan

1960

1970

1980

term

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

term

Figure 5: Posterior density summary of the ideal points of each justice for the terms in which they
served for the dynamic ideal point model, Justices Harlan-Goldberg.
38

1980

1990

2000

6
1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

Powell

Rehnquist

1980

1990

2000

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Scalia

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Souter

Thomas

2000

2
−6

−2

conservatism

2
−6

−2

conservatism

2
−2
−6

6

Kennedy
6

term

1990

2000

2

2000

term

1980

1990

−6
1960

term

1970

2000

−2

conservatism

2
−6

−2

conservatism

2
−2

2000

1990

6

O’Connor
6

Stevens
6

term

1990

2000

2

2000

term

1980

1990

−6
1960

term

1970

2000

−2

conservatism

2
−6

−2

conservatism

2
−2

1970

1990

6

Blackmun
6

term

6

term

1960

1970

1980

term

Ginsburg

Breyer

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

term

2
−2
−6

−6

−2

2

conservatism

6

term

6

1960

2
−6

1970

term

6

1960

−2

conservatism
1960

−6

conservatism

2
−6

1970

−6

conservatism

1960

conservatism

−2

conservatism

2
−2
−6

conservatism

1960

conservatism

Burger

6

Jackson

6

Minton

1960

1970

1980

term

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

term

Figure 6: Posterior density summary of the ideal points of each justice for the terms in which they
served for the dynamic ideal point model, Justices Minton-Breyer.
39

1970

1980

1990

0.8
0.4
0.0

2000

1960

1970

1980

Marshall

Brennan

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Warren

Clark

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Whittaker

Burton

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Fortas

Goldberg

2000

1960

1970

1980

term

1990

2000

1990

2000

0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4

term

1990

0.8

Reed

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

1980

2000

0.4

2000

term

1970

1990

0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4

1990

0.8

Frankfurter

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

1980

2000

0.4

2000

term

1970

1990

0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8

1990

2000

0.8

White

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

1980

1990

0.4

2000

term

1970

2000

0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4

1970

1990

0.8

Stewart

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

0.0

1960

Pr(median justice)
1960

term

0.0

1960

0.8

2000

0.4

1960

0.4

Pr(median justice)
1990

Douglas

0.0

0.8
0.4

1980

0.0

Pr(median justice)

1960

Pr(median justice)

1970

0.0

Pr(median justice)

1960

Pr(median justice)

Black

0.0

Pr(median justice)

Harlan

1960

1970

1980

term

Figure 7: Estimated posterior probabilities that each justice in a given term is the median justice
on the Court for the dynamic ideal point model, Justices Harlan-Goldberg.
40

1970

1980

1990

0.8
0.4
0.0

2000

1960

1970

1980

Powell

Rehnquist

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

O’Connor

Scalia

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Souter

Thomas

2000

1960

1970

1980

Ginsburg

Breyer

1980

term

1990

2000

1990

2000

0.4

1960

1970

1980

term

0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4

1970

2000

0.8

term

Pr(median justice)

term

1990

0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4

1990

0.8

Kennedy

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

1980

2000

0.4

2000

term

1970

1990

0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8

1990

2000

0.8

Stevens

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

1980

1990

0.4

2000

term

1970

2000

0.0

0.8
0.4
0.0

0.8
0.4

1970

1990

0.8

Blackmun

Pr(median justice)

term

Pr(median justice)

term

0.0

1960

Pr(median justice)
1960

term

0.0

1960

0.8

2000

0.4

1960

0.4

Pr(median justice)
1990

Burger

0.0

0.8
0.4

1980

0.0

Pr(median justice)

1960

Pr(median justice)

1970

0.0

Pr(median justice)

1960

Pr(median justice)

Jackson

0.0

Pr(median justice)

Minton

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

term

Figure 8: Estimated posterior probabilities that each justice in a given term is the median justice
on the Court for the dynamic ideal point model, Justices Minton-Breyer.
41

1.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

Econ

0.6

0.8

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.0

0.2

CivLib

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

2000

1990

2000

1.0
0.8
0.6

Fed

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.0

0.2

CivRght

1990

term

1.0

term

1980

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

1960

term

1970

1980
term

Figure 9: Term-by-term correlations of the ideal point posterior mean for the dynamic ideal point
model with the percent conservative votes in civil liberties, civil rights, economics, and federalism
cases, 1953-1999.

42

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
−0.5
−1.0
−1.5
1953 1957 1961 1965 1969 1973 1977 1981 1985 1989 1993 1997
term

Figure 10: Estimated posterior distribution of the location of the median justice for the dynamic
ideal point model.
43

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

1960

1980

1970

1980

1990

2000

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Clark

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Frankfurter

Whittaker

Burton

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Reed

Fortas

Goldberg

1960

1970

1980

term

1990

2000

1990

2000

1
−2 −1 0

conservatism

1

conservatism
2000

−2 −1 0

1

term

1990

2

term

2

term

1980

2000

1

2000

term

1970

1990

−2 −1 0

conservatism

1

conservatism

−2 −1 0

1
−2 −1 0

1990

2

term

2

term

1980

2000

1

2000

term

1970

1990

−2 −1 0

conservatism

1

conservatism

−2 −1 0

1

2000

2000

2

Warren
2

White
2

term

1990

1990

1

2000

term

1980

2000

2
1960

term

1970

1990

−2 −1 0

conservatism

1
−2 −1 0

1

conservatism

2

Brennan

2

Marshall

−2 −1 0

1960

1970

Stewart

2

1960

−2 −1 0

2000

term

2

1960

1

2
1970

term

−2 −1 0

conservatism

conservatism
1960

term

−2 −1 0

conservatism

1960

conservatism

1

conservatism
1970

−2 −1 0

1
−2 −1 0

conservatism

1960

conservatism

Douglas

2

Black

2

Harlan

1960

1970

1980

term

Figure 11: Posterior density summary of the ideal points of each justice for the terms in which they
served for the dynamic ideal point and case parameter model, Justices Harlan-Goldberg.
44

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

O’Connor

Scalia

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

Kennedy

Souter

Thomas

2000

1960

1970

1980

term

Ginsburg

Breyer

2000

1990

2000

1

1960

1970

1980

term

1960

1970

1980

term

1990

2000

1
−2 −1 0

−2 −1 0

1

conservatism

2

term

1990

−2 −1 0

conservatism

1

conservatism

−2 −1 0

1
−2 −1 0

1990

2

term

2

term

1980

2000

1

2000

term

1970

1990

−2 −1 0

conservatism

1

conservatism

−2 −1 0

1

1990

2000

2

Stevens
2

term

2

term

1980

1990

1

2000

term

1970

2000

−2 −1 0

conservatism

1

conservatism
1980

−2 −1 0

1

1970

1990

2

Rehnquist

2

Powell

2

Blackmun

2

1960

−2 −1 0

2000

term

2

1960

1

2
1970

term

−2 −1 0

conservatism

conservatism
1960

term

−2 −1 0

conservatism

1960

conservatism

1

conservatism
1970

−2 −1 0

1
−2 −1 0

conservatism

1960

conservatism

Burger

2

Jackson

2

Minton

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

term

Figure 12: Posterior density summary of the ideal points of each justice for the terms in which they
served for the dynamic ideal point and case parameter model, Justices Minton-Breyer.
45

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
−0.2
−0.4
1953 1957 1961 1965 1969 1973 1977 1981 1985 1989 1993 1997
term

Figure 13: Estimated posterior distribution of the location of the median justice for the dynamic
ideal point and case parameter model.
46

1970

1980

1990

1.0
0.0
−1.5

conservatism
1960

2000

1960

1970

1980

4th

5th

6th

1990

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

7th

8th

9th

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

1960

1970

1980

10th

11th

DC

term

1960

1970

1980

term

1990

2000

1990

2000

0.0
−1.5

conservatism

0.0

conservatism
2000

−1.5

0.0

1990

1.0

term

1.0

term

1980

2000

0.0

2000

term

1970

1990

−1.5

conservatism

0.0

conservatism

−1.5

0.0
−1.5

1990

2000

1.0

term

1.0

term

1980

1990

0.0

2000

term

1970

2000

−1.5

conservatism

0.0

conservatism
1980

−1.5

0.0

1970

1990

1.0

term

1.0

term

1.0

term

−1.5

1960

1.0

2000

1.0

1960

0.0

conservatism
1990

3rd

−1.5

1.0
0.0

1980

1.0

1960

conservatism

1970

−1.5

conservatism

1960

conservatism

2nd

−1.5

conservatism

1st

1960

1970

1980

term

1.0
0.0
−1.5

conservatism

Other

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

term

(a)

Figure 14: Estimated position of the prior mean (γc,t) of aﬃrmance points [xt ] from the lower
court of origin c for the dynamic ideal point and case parameter model.
47

