Discussion of paper by Peter McCullagh
To appear in The Annals of Statistics, 2002, 30.

By JULIAN BESAG
University of Washington
January 2002
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
Working Paper No. 19

1

Introduction
I am glad of the opportunity to discuss some aspects of Peter McCullagh’s paper. Parametric statistical formulations have recently come under intense attack (e.g. Breiman, 2001)
but I strongly disagree with the notion that they are no longer relevant in contemporary
data analysis. On the contrary, they are essential in a wealth of applications where one
needs to compensate for the paucity of the data. Personally, I see the various approaches to
data analysis (frequentist, Bayesian, machine learning, exploratory, or whatever) as complementary to one another rather than as competitors for outright domination. Unfortunately,
parametric formulations become easy targets for criticism when, as occurs rather often, they
are constructed with too little thought. The lack of demands on the user made by most statistical packages does not help matters and, despite my enthusiasm for Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) methods, their ability to fit very complicated parametric formulations can
be a mixed blessing. So, in that sense, McCullagh’s paper is timely and of course it makes
many valid points but I also think it is misconceived, both in its general aims and in the
agricultural application discussed in Section 8.
General comments
My overall impression of McCullagh’s framework is that it really concerns mathematical
models, whereas statistical models are more subtle, which is what makes the subject in
some ways more difficult and more rewarding. That said, I have always disliked the term
‘statistical model’ because I think it accords a status to formulations that is seldom earned in
practice. In spatial statistics, I failed to convince anyone to adopt the term ‘scheme’ (Besag,
1974) or ‘prescription’ (Besag, 1975) and these days often fall back on ‘representation’ (with
or without its Bayesian connotations). I prefer to reserve the term ‘model’ for something
that has a physical justification, such as the Poisson process in certain applications. I doubt
whether generalized linear models, for example, usually fall into this category, any more
than do spatial autoregressions. McCullagh seems to demand the universality of a physical
model, but without doing any of the physics, and surely this is too much to ask? A statistical
formulation can still be very useful without universality, so long as one restricts inferences
to what might loosely be described as ‘interpolation’ rather than ‘extrapolation’. Is this not
what we teach our students? Yet several of McCullagh’s criticisms and examples involve
‘extrapolation’ to parts of a space in which there is no claim that the original formulation
holds. This is different from the valid points that are made about ensuring consistency
between different measurement scales, say.
Moreover, if I was forced by law to call something a statistical model, then I would insist
that it must be useable for and assessable by data analysis, whereas a McCullagh statistical
model is a mathematical object involving data but not necessarily data analysis. As a
concrete example, I think McCullagh views the formulation in Section 8.6 as a lattice–based
approximation to a previous statistical model, whereas I would interpret it as a statistical
scheme motivated by a previous (I believe untenable) mathematical model.
2

Maybe the above point is a minor one but it is related to another that to me is crucial and
yet seems absent from McCullagh’s framework, namely the role of approximation. Indeed,
he writes, “Algebra does not easily deal with approximations or inequalities”. It seems
to me that, except for some rather limited randomization analyses, the initial choice of an
appropriate level of approximation is a vital ingredient in almost any statistical investigation
(though maybe requiring review in the light of the available data) and is perhaps the most
creative aspect of our subject. McCullagh seeks to produce rules within which creativity
must operate but it is not obvious that his formalism takes us constructively beyond sound
common sense. Furthermore, it can impose quite unreasonable constraints. Obviously, I
agree that one should always recognize and seek to rectify mathematical inconsistencies but
not slavishly so if this means abandoning a scientifically useful approximation in favor of a
formulation that is universally self–consistent but unsustainable in the region of interest.
Although, in principle, the purpose of an investigation should govern the formulation and
the type and the amount of data collected, practice is often harsher and the specification
one adopts depends qualitatively on the available sample size. Fisher (1922) wrote, “More
or less elaborate forms will be suitable according to the volume of the data.” Indeed, this
interdependence provides the salvation of frequentist p–values against the argument that
failure to ‘reject’ a model occurs merely because the sample size is too small. That is, the
argument becomes irrelevant if one recognizes that the generality of statistical formulations
should normally increase with sample size, until ultimately one may indeed be allowed the
luxury of machine learning. I may need to add that my interpretation of a p–value is
merely as an exploratory device that quantifies inconsistency between the observed data
and a particular formulation. McCullagh seems not to accept that sample size should be
an important ingredient in statistical modeling; see Section 4.2. Of course, I agree that
generally there should be coherence between formulations in going from sample size n to
n + 1 but this process also takes us from n to n2 and then there will often be overriding
concerns and a need for greater flexibility.
Markov random fields
Markov random fields (MRF’s) are distributions specified via their full conditionals (originally called local characteristics). The identification between any particular MRF and a
corresponding Gibbs distribution and vice versa follows from the Hammersley–Clifford theorem (e.g. Besag, 1974). The only restriction on either class is a minor positivity condition,
so Gibbs (say) distributions are not required to have the property McCullagh ascribes to
them in Section 6.6.
Exercise 7 is supposedly an example of the inconsistencies that plague MRF’s but seems
badly chosen. I agree of course that the formulation is bizarre but, without a context,
there is no reason why the distribution of Y in a cluster of size k, marginalized over its kth
component, should be required to coincide with that of Y in a cluster of size k − 1. For
example, suppose that k refers to the litter sizes in a study of piglets and that a measurement
3

is made on each piglet. Then exchangeability within litters might be a reasonable assumption
but marginalizing over a piglet in a litter of size k does not produce a litter of size k − 1. And
whatever the formulation, it seems reckless even to contemplate drawing inferences about
litters of size eight from data merely on litters of size two!
A better example of the contradictions that arise in MRF formulations is mentioned
in McCullagh’s discussion of Exercise 11. That is, a parametric MRF on a grid (say) is
generally inconsistent with the corresponding MRF on a subset of the grid. In principle,
consistency can be restored by conditioning on an appropriate boundary but this is usually
too wasteful in practice. Partial fixes may be available by using marginalizations of MRF’s
on Z 2 or otherwise; see Besag and Kooperberg (1995), Besag and Higdon (1999) and Rue
and Tjelmeland (2002). However, spatial effects are often of secondary importance, as in
variety trials, and the main intention is to absorb an appropriate level of spatial variation
in the formulation, rather than produce a spatial model with scientifically interpretable
parameters. Nevertheless, McCullagh’s basic point is well taken. For example, I view the
use of MRF’s in geographical epidemiology (e.g. Besag, York and Molli´e, 1991) as mainly of
exploratory value, in suggesting additional spatially related covariates whose inclusion would
ideally dispense with the need for a spatial formulation; see Byers and Besag (2000) for an
example on prostate cancer and ethnicity. A particularly blatant abuse of MRF’s occurs in
the analysis of social networks, where the parameters in Markov random graphs are often
ascribed substantive interpretations that are meaningless, if only because they depend on the
size of the system. I anticipate that MRF’s will play a diminishing role in statistical analysis
but, currently, they still have useful computational advantages when MCMC is used.
Agricultural field experiments
Although field experiments no longer feature in most graduate programs, their design and
analysis comprise an important area of application for statistics. Variety trials usually involve
say 25 to 75 varieties of a crop, with very limited replication, perhaps three or, even worse,
only two plots being assigned to each variety. Here I exclude early generation trials, often
having very large numbers of varieties and no replication but with regularly spaced check
plots of a standard variety used as controls.
It has always been recognized that generally a crop will perform much more similarly on
two plots close together than on plots further apart. Thus, Fisher (1928, p. 229) wrote, “...
the peculiarity of agricultural field experiments lies in the fact, verified in all careful uniformity trials, that the area of ground chosen may be assumed to be markedly heterogeneous,
in that its fertility varies in a systematic, and often a complicated manner from point to
point”. Soil measurements, such as pH, are not generally available to make adjustments for
fertility. Fisher’s solution to the problem resulted in the design and analysis of experiments,
an approach that provides rigorous inference via randomization analysis but, for modern–day
experiments, can be very inefficient when compared to model–based analysis.
McCullagh refers frequently to agricultural experiments and, in Section 8, proposes a
4

spatial formulation based on harmonic functions. Despite initial resistance, spatial methods
have become increasingly popular: for example, frequentist spatial analysis is now used in
some 5000 experiments annually in Australia alone (Gilmour, Cullis, Smith and Verbyla,
1999). In several places, McCullagh mentions Besag and Higdon (1999), henceforth BH,
though with no obvious enthusiasm. As background, BH describes a Bayesian approach to
statistical analysis, with some emphasis on variety trials, and examines several complicated
data sets; easier examples are analyzed in Besag and Higdon (1993), in Besag, Green, Higdon
and Mengersen (1995, Section 5) and in the rejoinder to discussion in BH. A first–order
Gaussian intrinsic autoregression is used as a simple but flexible baseline representation of
the spatial variation in fertility. BH does not pretend to provide a complete solution and
indeed discusses some current deficiencies. Below I will confine my comments to points raised
by McCullagh.
Response scale (Section 3.2). McCullagh makes the basic point that statistical analysis
should not depend on response scale. BH achieves this by standardizing the raw data, which
is effective but rather untidy in a Bayesian framework.
Covariate space (Section 3.2). McCullagh states that, for a trial in which fertilizer is
applied at rates in the range 0–300 kg/ha, he requires the inferential universe to extend to
all non–negative rates. Yet this seems pointless without a corresponding extension of the
model itself, even though any such extension cannot be assessed. Indeed, I presume that
McCullagh himself would be unwilling to draw inferences at a rate of, say, 400 kg/ha, without
additional information. Similarly, in his example on potatoes, I would not address varieties
that are not in the experiment or remain yet to be invented. Of course, this is not the case
if the tested varieties form a random sample from a definite population.
Experimental units (Section 3.2). In discussing variety trials, McCullagh claims, “It is
invariably understood, though seldom stated explicitly, that the purpose of such a trial is to
draw conclusions concerning variety differences, not just for plots of this particular shape,
size and orientation, but for comparable plots of various shapes, sizes and orientations.”
Here I would replace “invariably” by “almost never”. McCullagh seems to confuse variety
trials with uniformity trials in which a single variety is grown. Uniformity trials (e.g. the
Mercer and Hall data in Section 8.6) were used long ago to investigate optimal plot size
for genuine experiments but they are performed very rarely now and plot dimensions are
often determined by management practice rather than by statistical criteria. However, in
passing, I note that the asymptotic logarithmic behavior of the variogram for the BH intrinsic
autoregression is in good agreement with the empirical findings from uniformity trials in
Fairfield Smith (1938) and Pearce (1976).
Of course, in a genuine variety trial, one might want to predict what the aggregate yield
over the entire field would have been for a few individual varieties but this does not require
any extension of the formulation to McCullagh’s conceptual plots. Indeed, such calculations
are especially well suited to the Bayesian paradigm, both theoretically, because one is sup-

5

posed to deal with potentially observable quantities rather than merely with parameters,
and in practice, via MCMC, because the posterior predictive distributions are available rigorously. That is, for the aggregate yield of variety A, one uses the observed yields on plots
that were sown with A and generates a set of observations from the likelihood for those
that were not for each MCMC sample of parameter values, hence building a corresponding
distribution of total yield. One may also construct credible intervals for the difference in
total yields between varieties A and B and easily address all manner of questions in ranking
and selection that simply cannot be considered in a frequentist framework; for example, the
posterior probability that the total yield obtained by sowing any particular variety (perhaps
chosen in the light of the experiment) would have been at least 10% greater than that of
growing any other test variety in the field.
I am aware that the previous paragraph may be misconstrued. David Higdon and I
are primarily ‘spatialists’ rather than card–carrying Bayesians and BH merely explores some
consequences of a Bayesian approach. There are other caveats. The above arguments assume
that the formulation is correct, though one can and should carry out sensitivity analysis; also
any model–based formulation should leave room for outliers and other aberrations, which BH
discusses via hierarchical–t’s and other robust procedures that relax the baseline Gaussian
distributions.
More to the point, neither the agronomists who make recommendations nor the farmers
themselves care too much about the difference in yield between varieties A and B grown
on one particular experimental field. I presume McCullagh would include other ‘similar’
fields in his inferential universe, something I feel is useful only if there is additional external
information. Ideally, and often in practice, several trials are carried out in a range of environments, in which case progress can be made, perhaps invoking a hierarchical formulation;
see BH for an example on corn (maize) grown at six different sites in North Carolina. This
also downgrades the importance of the specific assumptions that are made at plot level (and
at any finer scale). If trials are not conducted at several sites, then recommendations need
to be moderated appropriately. Incidentally, the use of posterior predictive distributions,
with their additional variability, might be helpful in curbing the frustration of plant breeders
when the “best” variety experimentally does not subsequently perform as well.
Fertility (Section 8). Some care is required in what is meant by ‘fertility’: both McCullagh
and BH are rather vague. Fertility does not exist in abstraction, nor even in a particular field,
because it means different things for different crops. To me, ‘fertility’ represents the plot–
to–plot variation due to the environment, if a single variety in the trial is grown throughout.
This is well defined only if one can make the usual assumption that variety effects are
additive, perhaps after a transformation of yield. My version of fertility usually includes
standard fixed effects caused by human intervention, such as those due to blocks (if these
have a physical presence) or to boustrophedon harvesting, but here I shall assume such fixed
effects are taken into account separately. However, fertility must also cater for all other
environmental (usually thought of as random) effects and it is generally recognized that

6

these include indeterminate plot–aligned effects due to management practice. McCullagh
writes “It is absolutely essential to take account of the geometry of the plots” but he ignores
the influence of other effects that destroy any assumed isotropy in the natural variation of
the soil; and underlying isotropy is itself a somewhat dubious assumption in the first place. I
agree that McCullagh’s rule would often be adequate in practice (e.g. for the Mercer and Hall
data); indeed, many trials these days use plots that are sufficiently long and narrow for one–
dimensional representations to suffice. However, I would still prefer to include a parameter
for directionality, as in BH, rather than rely on the rule. This may involve a substantial
computational overhead, which McCullagh conveniently avoids, but it sacrifices negligible
information even when the rule holds. For an example where one–dimensional adjustment
suffices but in the opposite direction to that expected, see Besag and Higdon (1993, Section
1). McCullagh’s “absolutely essential” seems to me to indulge an inappropriate mathematical
assumption.
Variety effects (Section 8.3). McCullagh claims, “variety effects must be multiplicative”,
as a result of certain mathematical assumptions. This would lead me to reject the assumptions! Variety effects cannot be perfectly additive on yield itself, because yields cannot be
negative, but this is a different point and is usually irrelevant in practice. Of course, I agree
that one often needs to transform the data to achieve approximate additivity.
Incidentally, the need to attach a prior to variety effects in a Bayesian analysis will be
seen by many as a handicap but I think this is mistaken. Experience suggests close numerical
agreement between frequentist and Bayesian results for corresponding spatial formulations
when an approximately uniform variety prior is adopted. However, in practice, varieties
within known groups may be genetically very similar, in which case it is natural to adopt
appropriate Gaussian (or perhaps t) priors, which result in appropriate shrinkage of the
estimates, particularly when there is little replication. This would again help prevent the
frustration of plant breeders mentioned above.
Stationarity (Section 8.3). McCullagh agrees that stationarity of the environmental (random) effects is dubious (at the scale of the experiment). My experience in fitting stationary
lattice schemes is that typically one obtains parameter values on the non–stationary edge of
the parameter space, a finding that is not restricted to agricultural data. Thus, following
K¨
unsch (1986), I have preferred instead to use limiting intrinsic versions. For example, in one
spatial dimension, a first–order stationary autoregression becomes a random walk, with an
arbitrary level rather than being tied down somewhere. The increments need not be Gaussian. In two dimensions, a first–order Gaussian intrinsic autoregression can be interpreted in
terms of locally planar interpolation, in the same sense that a Gaussian random walk, viewed
bilaterally, is locally linear. Again the level is arbitrary, in accordance with a definition of
fertility based on variation. Mathematically, the scheme is an independent increments process, subject to the logical constraint that the increments on any loop sum to zero. This
may be a useful interpretation in devising non–Gaussian versions. BH also discusses locally
quadratic representations that do not attenuate peaks and troughs but suggests that these
7

may overfit fertility.
Spatial scale (Section 8). Scale invariance, at least to a very good approximation, is a
requirement for any genuine model of ‘fertility’ and so it is natural to begin in continuous
space, even if eventual interest is in discrete plots. However, it is less clear whether one
should work in 4–d space–time, in 3–d space or merely in 2–d. Even in 2-d, there has been
rather limited success in devising plausible formulations that are amenable to integration. In
geography, the issue of invariance is referred to as the modifiable areal unit problem and has
a long history. In statistics, early references are Heine (1955), Whittle (1962) and Mat´ern
(1986), first published (remarkably) in 1960. However, it seems extremely unlikely that
any formulation can be thought of as an accurate model for variation in fertility without
additional measurements of factors that influence the growth of the particular crop under
study. These could be in the form of extensive soil measurements, such as pH levels, or the
use of check plots of a standard variety, dispersed over the experimental site, as occurs in
single–replicate early generation trials.
Fortunately, the sole purpose of variety trials is to compare varieties, not to assess spatial
variation, which enters the formulation merely as a nuisance factor. With the benefit of some
replication, it seems reasonable to expect that an approximate representation of ‘fertility’ is
generally adequate for statistical analysis. All the investigations that I know of support this
view. Such investigations usually involve uniformity data to which dummy variety effects
are added, so that the true values are known to be zero. An early example is in Besag
and Kempton (1986). The findings typically suggest that the gains from spatial analysis in
a badly designed experiment provide improvements commensurate with standard analysis
and optimal design. This is not a reason to adopt poor designs but the simple fact is that,
despite the efforts of statisticians, many experiments are carried out using nothing better
than randomized complete blocks.
It is highly desirable that the representation of fertility is flexible but is also parsimonious because there are many variety effects to be estimated, with very limited replication.
McCullagh’s use of discrete approximations to harmonic functions in Section 8 fails on both
counts: first, local maxima or minima cannot exist except (artificially) at plots on the edge
of the trial; second, the degrees of freedom lost in the fit equals the number of such plots and
is therefore substantial (in fact, four less in a rectangular layout because the corner plots are
ignored throughout the analysis!).
Nevertheless, there is something appealing about the averaging property of harmonic
functions, if only it were a little more flexible. What is required is a random effects (in
frequentist terms) version and that is precisely the thinking behind the use of intrinsic
autoregressions in BH and elsewhere. Indeed, such schemes fit McCullagh’s discretized
harmonic functions perfectly, except for edge effects (because BH embeds the array in a
larger one to cater for such effects); and they also provide a good fit to more plausible
fertility functions. For specific comments on the Mercer and Hall data, see below.
Of course, spatial scale remains an important issue for variety trials and indeed is dis-

8

cussed empirically in Section 2.3 and in the rejoinder of BH. For 1–d adjustment, the simplest
plausible continuum process is Brownian motion with an arbitrary level, for which the necessary integrations can be implemented rigorously in the analysis. In the example in BH,
there is close agreement between the estimates from the discrete and continuous formulations
(which are not quite consistent mathematically). In 2-d, one can experiment with splitting
the plots and comparing the results obtained from the fertility priors at the two scales. This
can be done rigorously via MCMC by treating the yields in each pair of half plots as unknown but summing to the observed value. The few examples I have tried again suggest
close agreement but, of course, I would much rather see a sound mathematical justification
of approximate closure under spatial aggregation. This might be available via an appropriate
extension of McCullagh’s harmonic processes.
Mercer and Hall data (Section 8.6). McCullagh does not draw a clear distinction between
the purposes of analyzing data from uniformity trials and from genuine variety trials. He also
comments on a purely illustrative analysis of mine from more than 25 years ago about which
I wrote (Besag, 1974), “it cannot be claimed that the present auto–normal schemes have
been successful in reflecting the overall probabilistic structure of the wheat plots process”.
The perhaps definitive discussion of the Mercer and Hall data is McBratney and Webster
(1981), which uses the original records from Rothamsted Experimental Station to explain
the characteristics noted by McCullagh, in terms of a previous ridge and furrow system.
McCullagh’s formulation includes fixed effects for rows and columns in addition to those
for the harmonic approximation, so that more than 120 parameters are fitted. This type of
approach does not seem well suited to variety trials. The BH formulation fits two parameters,
one of which provides data–driven directional flexibility, which McCullagh does not allow.
Although, after 90 years, the Mercer and Hall data are now very tired indeed and deserve
a decent burial, it might be worth noting that the basic BH fit at least retains all of the
peaks and troughs in McBratney and Webster’s Table 1, though it is certainly not a physical
model.
Spatial design (Section 8.7). McCullagh proposes the development of a theory of efficient
harmonic designs for agricultural experiments. Such designs would be very close to those
that exist already for more relevant spatial formulations. For a recent review, see Atkinson
and Bailey (2001), especially Section 10.
Conclusion
Although McCullagh’s paper makes many valuable points, I believe that the approach is
too rigid and places an emphasis on pure mathematics that is inappropriate for applied
statistics. The paper promotes a universality in statistical modeling that is seldom present
or necessary in practice. The role of approximation and its interrelationship with sample
size seem to be ignored. As regards spatial statistics, the paper rediscovers old problems but
does not yet provide effective solutions. Nevertheless, I am glad to end on a positive note
9

by agreeing that the generalized covariance function in Section 8.6, known as the de Wijs
model in geostatistics and dating back to the early 1950’s, may be useful in developing more
coherent spatial formulations for the analysis of agricultural field experiments.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Ted Harding for very helpful discussions on this topic and to Peter McCullagh
for his patience in arguing about specific points. This research was supported by the Center
for Statistics and the Social Sciences with funds from the University Initiatives Fund at the
University of Washington.
References
Atkinson, A. C. and Bailey, R. A. (2001). One hundred years of the design of experiments
on and off the pages of Biometrika. Biometrika 88 53–97.
Besag, J. E. (1974). Spatial interaction and the statistical analysis of lattice systems (with
Discussion). J. R. Statist. Soc. B 36 192–236.
Besag, J. E. (1975). Statistical analysis of non-lattice data. The Statistician 24 179–195.
Besag, J. E., Green, P. J., Higdon, D. M. and Mengersen, K. L. (1995). Bayesian computation and stochastic systems (with Discussion). Statist. Sci. 10 3–66.
Besag, J. E. and Higdon, D. M. (1993). Bayesian inference for agricultural field experiments.
Bull. Internat. Statist. Inst. 55 121–136.
Besag, J. E. and Higdon, D. M. (1999). Bayesian analysis of agricultural field experiments
(with Discussion). J. R. Statist. Soc. B 61 691–746.
Besag, J. E. and Kempton, R. A. (1986). Statistical analysis of field experiments using neighbouring plots. Biometrics 78 301–304.
Besag, J. E. and Kooperberg, C. L. (1995). On conditional and intrinsic autoregressions. Biometrika
82 733–746.
Besag, J. E., York, J. C. and Molli´e, A. (1991). Bayesian image restoration, with two applications in spatial statistics (with Discussion). Ann. Inst. Statist. Math. 43 1–59.
Breiman, L. (2001). Statistical modeling: the two cultures (with Discussion). Statist. Sci.
16 199–231.
Byers, S. D. and Besag, J. E. (2000). Inference on a collapsed margin in disease mapping.
Statist. Med. 19 2243–2249.
10

Fairfield Smith, H. (1938). An empirical law describing heterogeneity in the yields of agricultural crops. J. Agric. Sci. 28 1–23.
Fisher, R. A. (1922). On the mathematical foundations of theoretical statistics. Phil. Trans.
R. Soc. Lond. A 222 309–368.
Fisher, R. A. (1928). Statistical Methods for Research Workers. Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh.
Gilmour, A. R., Cullis, B. R., Smith, A. B. and Verbyla, A. P. (1999). Discussion of paper
by J. E. Besag and D. M. Higdon. J. R. Statist. Soc. B 61, 731–732.
Heine, V. (1955). Models for two–dimensional stationary stochastic processes. Biometrika
42, 170–178.
K¨
unsch, H. R. (1987). Intrinsic autoregressions and related models on the two–dimensional
lattice. Biometrika 74 517–524.
Mat´ern, B. (1986). Spatial Variation. Springer–Verlag, New York.
McBratney, A. B. and Webster, R. (1981). Detection of ridge and furrow pattern by spectral analysis of crop yield. Internat. Statist. Rev. 49 45–52.
Pearce, S. C. (1976). An examination of Fairfield Smith’s law of environmental variation. J.
Agric. Sci. 87 21–24.
Rue, H. and Tjelemeland, H. (2002) . Fitting Gaussian Markov random fields to Gaussian
fields. Scand. J. Statist. 29 To appear.
Whittle, P. (1962). Topographic correlation, power–law covariance functions, and diffusion.
Biometrika, 49, 305–314.

11

