Random Effects Models for Network Data
Peter D. Hoff1
Working Paper no. 28
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195-4320
January 14, 2003

1 Department

of

Statistics,

Email:hoff@stat.washington.edu,

University

of

Washington,

Seattle,

Web:www.stat.washington.edu/hoff.

was supported by Office of Naval Research grant N00014-02-1-1011.

Washington.
This research

Abstract
One impediment to the statistical analysis of network data has been the difficulty in modeling
the dependence among the observations. In the very simple case of binary (0-1) network data,
some researchers have parameterized network dependence in terms of exponential family
representations. Accurate parameter estimation for such models is quite difficult, and the
most commonly used models often display a significant lack of fit. Additionally, such models
are generally limited to binary data. In contrast, random effects models have been a widely
successful tool in capturing statistical dependence for a variety of data types, and allow
for prediction, imputation, and hypothesis testing within a general regression context. We
propose novel random effects structures to capture network dependence, which can also
provide graphical representations of network structure and variability.

1

Network Dependence

Network data typically consist of a set of n nodes and a relational tie yi,j , measured on each
ordered pair of nodes i, j = 1, . . . , n. This framework has many applications, including the
study of war, trade, the behavior of epidemics, the interconnectedness of the World Wide
Web, and telephone calling patterns.
It is often of interest to relate each network response yi,j to a possibly pair-specific vector
valued predictor variable xi,j . A flexible framework for doing so is the generalized linear
model (see, for example McCullagh and Nelder 1983), in which the expected value of the
response is modeled as a function of a linear predictor β 0 xi,j , where β is an unknown vector
of regression coefficients to be estimated from the data. The ordinary regression model
E(yi,j ) = β 0 xi,j is perhaps the most commonly used model of this type. A generalized
linear model for binary (0-1) data is logistic regression, which relates the expectation of the
p
response to the regression variable via the relation g(E[yi,j ]) = β 0 xi,j , where g(p) = log 1−p
.

As an example of the use of such statistical models, consider the analysis of strong
friendship ties among 13 boys and 14 girls in a sixth-grade classroom, as collected by Hansell
(1984). Each student was asked if they liked each other student “a lot”, “some”, or “not
much”. A strong friendship tie is considered present if a student likes another student “a lot.”
Also recorded is the sex of each student. The data, presented in Figure 1, suggest a general
preference for same-sex friendship ties. Of potential interest is statistical estimation of this
preference, as well as a confidence interval for its value. One approach for such statistical
analysis would be to formulate the logistic regression model g(E[yi,j |xi,j , β]) = β0 + β1 xi,j ,
where xi,j is one if children i and j are of the same sex, and zero otherwise, and β = (β0 , β1 )
are parameters to be estimated.
Estimation of regression coefficients β typically proceeds under the assumption that the
observations are conditionally independent given β and the xi,j ’s. However, this assumption
is often violated by many network datasets. For example, the data on friendship ties display
several types of dependence:
Within-node dependence: The number of ties sent by each student varies considerably,
ranging from 0 to 19 with a mean of 5.8 and a standard deviation of 4.7 (the standard
deviation of the number of ties received was 3.2). This node level variability suggests
that responses from the same individual are positively dependent, in that the probability that yi,j = 1 (i sends a tie to j), is high if we know yi,k = 1 for lots of other nodes
k, and lower if yi,k is mostly zero. More formally, we may wish to have a model in
which Pr(yi,j = 1|yi,1 , . . . , yi,j−1 , yi,j+1, . . . , yi,n ) is an increasing function of yi,k , k 6= j.
1

(a)

(b)

boy
girl

Figure 1: (a) Sociomatrix for friendship data: Rows and columns 1-13 are boys, 14-27 are
girls; (b) Graphical representation of friendship data: Dark blue lines are reciprocated ties.
Reciprocity: For directed relations, it is often expected that yi,j and yj,i are positively
dependent. The classroom data exhibit a sizable degree of reciprocity, in that the
number of pairs in which yi,j = yj,i = 1 is 24, which is more than we would expect due
to just random chance: In only 11 of 500 (2.2%) random permutations of the network
data, holding constant the number of ties sent by each student, did the number of
such reciprocal dyads exceed 24. The average number of reciprocal dyads in the 500
permutations was 17.2. This suggests an appropriate model would be one which allowed
for positive dependence between yi,j and yj,i .
Transitivity and Balance: In many situations we expect that two nodes with a positive
relation will relate similarly to other nodes. For relations which are positive or negative,
this has led to the concept of “balance” in which a positive value for yi,j implies yi,k and
yj,k are likely to be of the same sign for other nodes k. A related concept is transitivity,
in which a large value of yi,j together with a large value of yj,k implies a large value of
yi,k (see Wasserman and Faust, 1994, Chapter 6).
The classroom data exhibit a large degree of transitivity, in that the number of nonvacuously transitive ordered triples (see Wasserman and Faust, page 244), is 400. In
500 random permutations of the network data, holding constant the number of ties
sent by each student, the largest observed number of transitive triples was 347. This
indicates the data exhibit significantly more transitivity than would be expected due to
just random chance and node-level variability, and an appropriate model should allow
for some form of transitive dependence.
2

In this article, we discuss statistical regression models which can describe such types of
network dependence. This is done by incorporating random effects structures in a generalized linear model setting. We discuss parameter estimation for these models in a Bayesian
framework, and provide example statistical analyses of the classroom data described above
and of a dataset on alliances and conflict among New Guinean tribes.

2

Network Random Effects Models

Generalized linear models, or glm’s, are ubiquitous tools which extend linear regression
models to non-normal data and transformably additive covariate effects (McCullagh and
Nelder, 1983). A standard glm assumes the expectation of the response variable yi,j can be
written as a function of a linear predictor η = β 0 xi,j . Assuming observations are conditionally
independent given the xi,j ’s and β, the model is:
Pr(y1,2 , . . . , yn,n−1 |X, β) =

Y

p(yi,j |xi,j , β)

i6=j

g(E[yi,j |xi,j , β]) = ηi,j = β 0 xi,j .
Examples of glm’s include ordinary linear regression, logistic regression, Poisson regression,
and quasilikelihood methods.
As discussed above, one feature that distinguishes network data is the likely dependence
among the yi,j ’s. This lack of independence makes standard glm models inappropriate. In
other settings which involve dependent data, a common approach to parameter estimation
has been the generalized linear mixed-effects model (McCulloch and Searle, 2002) in which
it is assumed the network observations can be modeled as conditionally independent, given
appropriate random effects terms which can be incorporated into the glm framework. The
model above becomes
Pr(y1,2 , . . . , yn,n−1 |X, β, γ) =

Y

p(yi,j |xi,j , β, γi,j )

(1)

i6=j

g(E[yi,j |X, β, γi,j ]) = ηi,j = β 0 xi,j + γi,j ,
where γi,j is an unobserved random effect. The distribution of and dependence among the
γi,j ’s determines the dependence among the yi,j ’s. For many kinds of network data, we may
wish to find a form for the γi,j ’s that induces the kinds of dependence described above, such
as within-node dependence, reciprocity, transitivity, and balance.
A simple approach to modeling the node variability that gives rise to within-node dependence is the use of random intercepts, that is, to let γi,j = ai + bj + i,j , where ai and bj
3

represent independently distributed sender- and receiver-specific effects. Such a distribution
on the ai ’s and bj ’s induces a positive dependence among responses involving a common
node. Typically, the distribution of these effects are taken to be normal distributions with
means equal to zero, and variances to be estimated from the data.
Modeling other forms of network dependence is not as straightforward. In the case of
binary logistic regression, Hoff, Raftery, and Handcock (2002) propose using a latent-variable
approach as a means of modeling balance, transitivity, and reciprocity in network data. As
applied to the glm above, such an approach presumes the error i,j can be written as a
function f of independent k-dimensional latent variables zi , zj ∈ Rk so that i,j = f (zi , zj ),
i, j = 1, . . . , n. The function f is chosen to be simple and to mimic the forms of network
dependence described above. Incorporating both the random intercepts and the zi ’s into the
model, and assuming independent normal distributions, (1) becomes
ηi,j = β 0 xi,j + ai + bj + f (zi , zj )
a1 , . . . , an ∼ i.i.d. Normal(0,σa2 )
b1 , . . . , bn ∼ i.i.d. Normal(0,σb2 )
z1 , . . . , zn ∼ i.i.d. Normal(0,Ik × σz2 ),

where β, σa2 , σb2 , and σz2 are parameters to be estimated, and Ik is the k × k identity matrix.
Additionally, if the researcher is interested in local network structure, it may be desirable to
estimate ai , bi , zi for each node.
It remains to choose a suitable function f . One approach is to presume reciprocity,
transitivity, and balance arise due to the existence of unobserved node characteristics, and
that nodes relate preferentially to other nodes with similar values of those characteristics.
This motivates letting f be a measure of “similarity” between the random effects zi and zj ,
which gives rise to a “latent position” interpretation as discussed in Hoff et al. (2002). For
example, consider the following forms for f :
• (distance model) f (zi , zj ) = −|zi − zj |;
• (inner product model) f (zi , zj ) = zi0 zj .
In the case of directed responses, each of the above functions induces a degree of reciprocity
as i,j = f (zi , zj ) = f (zj , zi ) = j,i due to the symmetry of f . The common error term
induces a positive dependence between yi,j and yj,i .
The above functions also give rise to higher-order dependence. For example, the distance
model gives an error structure that is inherently transitive, since |zi −zj | ≤ |zi −zk |+|zk −zj |
4

by the triangle inequality. The observation of strong ties from i to k and k to j suggests
that |zi − zk | and |zk − zj | are small, and therefore |zi − zj | cannot be too large and we
might expect strong ties from i to j. The inner product model satisfies a similar but more
complicated relation: in the special case that the vectors zi are of unit length, zi0 zj ≥
p
zi0 zk + zk0 zj − (1 + 2 (1 − zk0 zi )(1 − zk0 zj )).
An undirected signed graph is said to be balanced if the product of the relations in all

cycles is nonnegative, i.e. yi1 ,i2 × yi2 ,i3 × · · · × yik−1 ,ik ≥ 0 for all sequences of indices for which
the corresponding data are available (Wasserman and Faust 1994, Chapter 6). As f (z i , zj )
exists in the model for each pair i, j, balance in terms of this random effect is equivalent to the
balance of the complete graph formed by the sociomatrix with i, jth entry equal to f (z i , zj ).
For a complete signed graph, all cycles are balanced if and only if each triad is balanced,
i.e. f (zi , zj ) × f (zj , zk ) × f (zk , zi ) ≥ 0 for all triples i, j, k. Interestingly, this is satisfied
by the inner product model in one dimension (zi ∈ R), as (zi0 zj ) × (zj0 zk ) × (zk0 zj ) ≥ 0. For
zi ∈ Rk , k > 1, these terms are not necessarily balanced, although they are “probabilistically”
balanced in the following sense: if the directions of the zi ’s are uniformly distributed, then
the expected number of balanced triads exceeds the number of imbalanced triads, with the
difference decreasing with increasing k. An additional feature of the inner product model is
that if the directions of the zi0 s are uniformly distributed, then in general E(zi0 zj ) = 0. In
particular, if each zi is a vector of k independent normal random variables with mean 0 and
variance σz2 , then zi0 zj will have mean 0 and variance kσz4 , furthering the interpretation of
zi0 zj as an error term.
On the other hand,−|zi − zj | is always negative, and so we lack this interpretation for
the distance model. However, the distance model may be easier to interpret as a spatial
representation of network structure: The zi ’s can be interpreted as positions in a latent
“social space,” with nodes having strong ties to one another being estimated as close together,
and subsets of nodes with strong within-group ties being estimated as clusters in this social
space. Additionally, plotting estimates and confidence regions for the zi ’s gives a graphical,
model-based representation of the network data.

3

Parameter Estimation

Given network data Y = {yi,j } and possible regressor variables X = {xi,j }, the goal is to
make statistical inference on the unknown model parameters, which we generically denote
as θ. The parameter θ may include the regression coefficients β, the variances of the random
effects, and possibly the random effects themselves. We take a Bayesian approach to param5

eter estimation, in that we posit a (potentially diffuse) prior probability distribution p(θ),
and base our inference on the posterior, or conditional distribution of the parameters given
the information in the data, which is given by Bayes’ rule, p(θ|Y ) = p(Y |θ) × p(θ)/p(Y ).
A closed form expression for the desired conditional distribution is generally unavailable,
however we can make approximate random samples from this distribution using Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation (Gelfand and Smith 1990, Besag, Green, Higdon,
and Mengersen 1995). MCMC-based inference constructs a dependent sequence of θ-values
as follows: Given the lth-value θl in the sequence,
• sample a parameter value θ ∗ from a proposal distribution J(θ|θl );
• compute the acceptance probability


p(Y |θ ∗ )p(θ ∗ )J(θl |θ ∗ )
r = max 1,
;
p(Y |θ)p(θ)J(θ ∗ |θl )
• set θl+1 = θ ∗ with probability r, otherwise set θl+1 = θl .
The particular details, such as the choice of the proposal distribution J, will depend on the
model and the data. See Hoff et al. (2002) for MCMC algorithms designed specifically for
such latent variable models.
The result of the algorithm is a sequence of θ values having a distribution that is approximately equal to the target distribution p(θ|Y ). Statistical inference can be based on these
samples. For example, a point estimate of θ is often taken to be the posterior mean, which
is approximated by the average of the sampled θ-values. Posterior confidence intervals can
be based on the sample quantiles.

4

Example Data Analyses

We now apply the methods described above to the statistical analysis of two example
datasets. In the first example, we use the inner product model as a means of making
inference on the preference for same sex friendship ties in Hansell’s classroom data. In the
second example, we use the distance model to make inference on the network of alliances
among sixteen New Guinean tribes studied by Read (1954). Both datasets involve binary
network data, although the methods are easily adapted to other types of network data via
an appropriate generalized linear model.

6

4.1

Classroom Friendships

Hansell’s (1984) data exhibit a tendency of children to form same sex friendship ties, in that
72% of the ties are same-sex. We consider a statistical analysis of this preference, in which
we estimate the log odds of a same-sex tie, as well as make a confidence interval for its value.
This is done via the logistic regression model with random effects described above,
g(E[yi,j |β, xi,j , γi,j ]) = β0 + β1 xi,j + γi,j ,
where xi,j is the indicator that i and j are of the same sex, β = {β0 , β1 } are parameters to
be estimated, and γi,j is a random effect. In this parametrization, β0 is the log odds of a
friendship between children of opposite sexes, and β0 + β1 is the log odds for children of the
same sex.
As described in the introduction, Hansell’s (1984) classroom data exhibit several forms
of network dependence, including node-level variability, reciprocity, and transitivity. This
suggests we model the data with node-specific rates of sending and receiving ties, as well as
a term which captures reciprocity and transitivity. We choose the following inner-product
model with random sender and receiver effects:
log odds(yi,j = 1) = β0 + β1 xi,j + ai + bj + zi0 zj
a1 , . . . , an ∼ i.i.d. Normal(0, σa2 )
b1 , . . . , bn ∼ i.i.d. Normal(0, σb2 )
z1 , . . . , zn ∼ i.i.d. Normal(0, σz2 )
The parameters in this model are the regression coefficients β0 and β1 , as well as the variance
terms σa2 , σb2 , σz2 , which determine the dependencies between ties.
A Bayesian analysis was performed using the methods outlined in Section 3. The prior
distributions for β0 and β1 were taken to be independent, diffuse normal distributions, both
having mean zero and variance 100. The variance terms σa2 , σb2 , σz2 were given diffuse inverseGamma(2,1) distributions, having an expectation of one but an infinite variance. An MCMC
algorithm was used to obtain the 500,000 approximate samples from the posterior distribution p(β0 , β1 , σa2 , σb2 , σz2 |Y ). Marginal posterior distributions of β1 , σa2 , σb2 , σz2 are presented in
Figure 2. The results suggest a significant preference for same sex friendship ties, in that the
posterior distribution for β1 is centered around a median of 1.49, and a 95% quantile-based
confidence interval for β1 is (0.84, 2.11), which does not contain zero. The posterior distributions of σa2 and σz2 have deviated from their prior distributions and have moved to the
right, giving evidence for sender-specific variability as well as the need for the latent variables
7

z1 , . . . , zn . The posterior for σb2 concentrates mass on low values, and is not much different
from the prior distribution, indicating little evidence for strong receiver-specific variability.
p(sigma_a^2|Y)

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.2

0.4

0.3

0.6

0.4

0.8

0.5

1.0

0.6

1.2

p(beta|Y)

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

0

1

2

3

5

6

7

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.5

0.4

0.6

1.0

0.8

1.0

1.5

4

p(sigma_z^2|Y)

1.2

p(sigma_b^2|Y)

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

Figure 2: Marginal posterior distributions for the classroom data: Dashed lines represent
the prior distributions for the variance parameters, solid lines the posterior. Vertical lines
give the posterior median.
In comparison, a naive approach to inference would be to treat each possible tie as a
Bernoulli random variable, independent of all other ties. Using standard logistic regression,
our estimate of β1 is 1.3 with a standard error of 0.2, giving an approximate 95% confidence
interval of (0.91,1.70), which is of substantially smaller width than the interval obtained
with the random effects model. Of course, we might expect the confidence interval based on
this naive analysis to be too small, as it incorrectly assumes all ties between individuals are
independent and thus overestimates the precision of the parameter estimate.

8

4.2

Tribal alliances

Read (1954) describes a number of network relations between sixteen New Guinean tribes.
Here we consider the network of alliances between tribes, letting yi,j = 1 if tribes i and j
have an alliance, and yi,j = 0 otherwise. We analyze these data using the simple distance
model with no covariates or separate sender- and receiver-specific random effects:
log odds Pr(yi,j = 1|β0 , zi , zj ) = β0 − |zi − zj |,
where β0 represents the baseline odds of a tie between two nodes that have the same latent
position (i.e. β0 the maximum log odds of a tie), and the zi ’s are latent positions in R2 .
Without separate sender- and receiver-specific effects, we may expect that tribes with many
alliances will be estimated as being more centrally located, and those with few ties as being
on the periphery.
Bayesian estimates and confidence intervals for β0 and the zi ’s are obtained using the
methods outlined in Section 3. In particular, samples of latent positions from the posterior
distribution p(z1 , . . . , z16 |Y ) are plotted in the first panel of Figure 1 (colors are chosen so
that nearby node locations will have similar colors). Additionally, a black line drawn between
nodes indicates the presence of an alliance.
Ad-hoc approaches, or simple point estimates of latent locations, might uncover some of
the structure of the network. Our method goes beyond this by providing posterior confidence
regions for node locations, which in turn give us a model-based measure of uncertainty about
the network structure. Additionally, forms of predictive inference can be obtained from such
a model. For example, suppose that the presence or absence of an alliance between pair (i, j)
is unobserved or missing. The model can be fit with all available information (excluding the
unknown yi,j ), and from the available information the posterior distributions of zi and zj
can be obtained. From these, predictive inference about the value of yi,j can be made.
Also collected by Read (1954) were data on conflicts between the tribes. It is interesting
to note that, based on a clustering of nodes (1,2,15,16), (3,4,6,7,8,11,12), and (5,9,10,13,14),
there were no within-cluster conflicts, even though not every tribe within a cluster had an
alliance with every other cluster co-member. Additionally, node 7, towards the center of
the alliance structure, had no conflicts with any of the other 15 tribes. We note that both
responses (conflict and alliance) could be modeled concurrently by a similar method, in
which a multinomial logistic random effects model is employed in place of the binary logistic
random effects model above.

9

10

9
13

14
5

1521
16
7

11
3 8 6 12
4

Figure 3: Tribal alliance network and marginal posterior distributions of locations.

5

Discussion

This article proposes a form of generalized linear mixed-effects model for the statistical
analysis of network data for which parameter estimation is practical to implement. The
approach has some advantages over existing social network models and inferential procedures:
the approach allows for prediction and hypothesis testing; lends itself to a model-based
method of network visualization; is highly extendable and interpretable in terms of well
known statistical procedures such as regression and generalized linear models; and has a
feasible means of exact parameter estimation.
The models discussed here can capture some types of network dependence, although it is
possible (or even likely) that in many datasets there are types of dependencies that cannot
be well-represented with these models. It then becomes important to develop methods for
assessing model lack of fit, and determining the effect of lack of fit on the estimation of
regression coefficients. Furthermore, it may be useful to combine the types of random effects
discussed here with other types of random effects, or latent variables. For example, Nowicki
and Snijders (2001) discuss a latent class model, a useful model for identifying clusters of
nodes that relate to others in similar ways. Their latent class model, combined with types
10

of random effects models presented here and possibly other random effects structures, could
provide a rich class of models for dependent network data.

References
Besag, J., Green, P., Higdon, D., and Mengersen, K. (1995), “Bayesian computation and stochastic
systems,” Statist. Sci., 10, 3–66, With comments and a reply by the authors.
Gelfand, A. E. and Smith, A. F. M. (1990), “Sampling-based approaches to calculating marginal
densities,” J. Amer. Statist. Assoc., 85, 398–409.
Hansell, S. (1984), “Cooperative groups, weak ties, and the integration of peer friendships,” Social
Psychology Quarterly, 47, 316–328.
Hoff, P. D., Raftery, A. E., and Handcock, M. S. (2002), “Latent Space Approaches to Social
Network Analysis,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97, to appear.
McCullagh, P. and Nelder, J. A. (1983), Generalized linear models, Chapman & Hall, London.
McCulloch, C. E. and Searle, S. R. (2001), Generalized, linear, and mixed models, Wiley Series
in Probability and Statistics: Texts, References, and Pocketbooks Section, Wiley-Interscience
[John Wiley & Sons], New York.
Nowicki, K. and Snijders, T. A. B. (2001), “Estimation and Prediction for Stochastic Block Structures,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 96, 1077–1087.
Read, K. (1954), “Cultures of the central highlands, New Guinea,” Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 10, 1–43.
Wasserman, S. and Faust, K. (1994), Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

11

