Improved regression estimation of a multivariate relationship with population
data on the bivariate relationship1

Mark S. Handcock
University of Washington, Seattle
Michael S. Rendall
RAND and Pennsylvania State University
Jacob E. Cheadle
Pennsylvania State University

Working Paper no. 36
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
University of Washington

September 23, 2003

1

Mark S. Handcock is Professor of Statistics and Sociology, Department of Statistics, University of Washington,
Box 354322, Seattle WA 98195-4322 (Email: handcock@stat.washington.edu; Web:
www.stat.washington.edu/handcock). Michael S. Rendall is a demographer at the RAND Corporation,
Santa Monica, CA and Adjunct Associate Professor of Sociology and Demography, Population Research Institute,
the Penn State University. Jacob E. Cheadle is a doctoral student in Sociology and Demography at the Pennsylvania
State University. This work was funded by grants by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
to the first two authors (R01 HD043472 01), to the Penn State University Population Research Institute (Core Grant
R24 HD41025 and for Interdisciplinary Training in Demography 5T32 HD07514), and to the Center for Studies in
Demography and Ecology at the University of Washington (Core Grant R24 HD42828). We are very grateful for
programming assistance from Leslie Benson, and for comments from participants at seminars at Penn State
University and the University of Washington.

Abstract
Regression coefficients specify the partial effect of a regressor on the dependent variable.
Sometimes the bivariate, or limited multivariate relationship of that regressor variable with the
dependent variable is known from population-level data. We show here such population-level
data can be used to reduce variance and bias about estimates of those regression coefficients
from sample survey data. The method of constrained MLE is used to achieve these
improvements. Its statistical properties are first described. The method constrains the weighted
sum of all the covariate-specific associations (partial effects) of the regressors on the dependent
variable to equal the overall population association of one or more regressors. We refer to those
regressors whose bivariate or limited multivariate relationships with the dependent variable are
constrained by population data as being “directly constrained.” Our study investigates the
improvements in the estimation of directly-constrained variables, and also the improvements in
the estimation of other regressor variables that may be correlated with the directly-constrained
variables, and thus “indirectly-constrained” by the population data. The example application is to
the marital fertility of black versus white women. The difference between white and black
women's rates of marital fertility, available from population-level data, gives the overall
association of race with fertility. The constrained MLE that uses this information both provides a
far more powerful statistical test of the partial effect of being black, and purges the test of a bias
that would otherwise distort the estimated magnitude of this effect. We find only trivial
reductions, however, in the standard errors of the parameters for indirectly-constrained
regressors.

Keywords: minority group hypothesis; combining data-sets.

2

1. Introduction
A typical situation in the social sciences is that data are available in aggregate levels of a societal
unit, but have too little detail. These data are therefore considered useful only at a level of
preliminary description or for cross-societal comparison. The best-known and most general of
societal data collections in the United States is the decennial census of households and
individuals. A glance at national or subnational statistical yearbooks, however, reveals many
other population collections or registers of events of potential interest to sociologists. Individuals,
businesses, and non-profit institutions register their coming into being, their ceasing to exist, and
certain changes to their status. Annual income is recorded in corporate and individual tax returns.
Entry to, and exit from, governmental support programs (low-income benefit programs,
unemployment insurance, old-age and disability insurance, etc.) and punishment or supervision
programs (prisons, probation, restraining orders, child-support orders) at the national, state, and
local levels are typically registered and compiled. Limited amounts of information about the
individuals experiencing the events are typically also collected.
Standard regression modeling techniques are not appropriately used with these
population-level data, as there are too few variables to estimate behavioral models. Putting this
into a statistical framework, sociologists employing regression methods are typically interested in
studying the association between an dependent variable and an explanatory variable of interest (a
“target variable”). The estimates of this association are of more interest after controlling for
confounding associations of variables related to both the dependent variable and the explanatory
variable of interest (“control variables”). Not infrequently, data at the population level are
available for the dependent variable and the target variable, but not for an adequate set of control
variables. In this case, only a “misspecified” model may be estimated with these population data.
The sociologist then turns to survey data to specify the model more fully. Typically she or he
then abandons the information on the overall associations between the dependent and target
variable provided by the population data.
That social scientists are forced to choose either population data or sample data, however,
need not be assumed. The advantages and disadvantages of sample versus population data
collections point strongly to their being complementary. The advantages of population data are
that they are without sampling error and may be much less subject to biases due to non-response.
These advantages mirror the main disadvantages of survey samples: sampling error and bias due
to non-response. The main advantage of sample surveys is that a large amount of information is
collected about individuals, often with special thought in the selection of variables towards those
that may have causal associations. These are the variables from which a behavioral model may
be specified. The challenge then is to develop and apply statistical methods that combine
population data’s more precise and less biased estimates of the overall associations between the
dependent and target variables with survey data’s breakdown of these overall associations into
multivariate associations between dependent, target, and control variables. The main purpose of
the present study is to describe and illustrate a statistical method that combines the respective
advantages of survey and population data. The method is constrained maximum likelihood
estimation. Population-level data provide the constraints, in the form of information about the
overall association between an dependent variable and a target explanatory variable. Estimates of
the multivariate associations between the dependent variable and the predictor variables using
survey data are then constrained to equal the overall associations.

3

Statistical Theory of Constrained Maximum Likelihood Estimation and
Other Methods for Combining Population and Survey Data in Regression Analysis
The traditional statistical method for combining survey and aggregated population data is poststratification (Kish 1965, Lohr 1999). Broadly defined, post-stratification refers to methods for
adjusting bias and reducing variance in survey results by reweighting observations after
selection (Smith 1991). Until recently, the statistical literature on the statistical properties of
post-stratified estimates has been relatively sparse (Holt and Smith 1979), but has been applied
also to the modeling of survey data using constraining information from population data
(Deming and Stephan 1942, Ireland and Kullback 1968). More recently, Qin and Lawless
(1994) develop methods for combining information from multiple sources when the information
about the parameters of interest can be expressed in terms of unbiased estimating equations.
They establish some theoretical properties of contingency tables with population data for
marginal probabilities. Their equations are applied in conjunction with the empirical likelihood
for the sampled information to estimate the parameters. This approach is closely allied to the
econometric approaches we discuss below.
In part the lack of development of the post-stratification approach to modeling was because it
has been largely motivated by, and is usually applied in, design-based inference. However, the
ubiquitous nature of non-response and attrition has lead many researchers to instead consider
model-based inference. In design (i.e. randomization) based inference, the population values are
regarded as fixed numbers and inference is based on the probability sampling scheme for the
survey. If non-response exists, design-based inference is inappropriate except under very strict
assumptions about the nature of the non-response. In the alternative, model-based perspective,
non-response and attrition are regarded as further sample selection, and the ultimate sampling
scheme must be inferred from a selection model and the observed data. In this case poststratification can be used to make the non-response ignorable for inference in the sense of Little
and Rubin (1987). From this perspective the combination of survey and population data should
be model-based (Little 1991, 1993, 1995). Little and Wu (1991) compare the design-based and
model-based approaches when the sampled population differs from the population data due to
non-response or coverage errors.
Little (1993) develops a Bayesian model-based approach to combine information from
sample surveys and population data. The approach assumes the population distribution of a
categorical variable in a simple random sampled sample survey is determined from the
population information. His approach is to post-stratify on the variable using a Gaussian model
for the response given the post-stratification variables. This approach is useful also when the
survey is subject to simple forms of non-response and coverage errors. Further, the model is
easily extended to the case where a joint distribution of multiple variables is available from the
population data. Application to multiple datasets, some with fewer covariates, is also possible.
This is analogous to population level data with fewer variables combined with survey data with
more variables. This may be restated as a partially-missing-regressors problem (Little 1992).
Including observations with some missing regressors nevertheless increases the efficiency of the
estimation of parameters for the regressors that are present. In this way, missing data
observations are treated as a second type of sample that must be combined with the sample of
complete data observations. This framework can be extended to cover situations in which
samples are combined from different studies with overlapping, but not completely identical, sets
of regressors. Gelman and Little (1998) and Gelman and Carlin (2001) develop further method

4

of adjustment that are based on modeling population structure. Bethlehem (2002) shows how the
Dutch POLS social survey can be adjusted for unit non-response, by including population level
data.
There is a well developed literature on the econometric theory for combining population-level
and sample-survey data. This work dates back to at least Manski and Lerman (1977). The approach
is conceptually closely related to what econometricians refer to as choice-based, or endogenously
stratified random sampling. In (bio)statistics this is often studied under the title of case-control or
retrospective sampling schemes (Prentice and Pyke 1979, Breslow and Day 1980). Of most direct
importance is the work by Imbens and Lancaster (1994, 1996) and Hellerstein and Imbens (1999).
This is a very active research area in econometrics that has direct relevance to other social science
fields. Imbens and colleagues (Imbens and Lancaster 1994; Hellerstein and Imbens 1999) explore
the benefits of combining population with survey data, using economic data in a Generalized
Method of Moments (GMM) regression framework. Imbens and Lancaster (1994) consider the
estimation of parameters in the regression model under moment restrictions on the data contributed
by population data, and report large gains in efficiency by incorporating marginal moments from
census data with sample-survey joint distributions. Hellerstein and Imbens (1999) give an example
of the bias-reduction possibilities of including aggregate data in the context of estimating wages
from survey data. In that case, the survey data suffers from possibly non-random attrition. They also
show how this may be addressed by means of a re-weighting scheme under an implicit assumption
that the values are missing at random. This approach can be seen as an extension of poststratification using a special case of the empirical likelihood estimator (Qin and Lawless 1994,
Imbens, Johnson and Spady 1998). While the approach does not require parametric assumptions
about the error distributions, it does not benefit from this information either. This reduces smallsample statistical efficiency and excludes Bayesian extensions relaxing the assumption that the
constraint values are exact. In addition, the approach does not adjust for non-response which is not
missing at random. Likelihood-based methods and maximum likelihood estimators in particular are
more frequently found in sociological and much other social-scientific modeling work, due to their
good statistical properties and because likelihood-based methods provide a general conceptual and
inferential framework.
There is also a tradition of combining population and sample data in macro-level
demographic analyses, using techniques including ‘model’ life tables and indirect
standardization (Smith 1992). More recently, Handcock, Huovilainen, and Rendall (2000)
demonstrated the potential of a constrained maximum likelihood estimator to combine sample
survey data with birth registration data in the estimation of a multivariate model of fertility.
Large gains in efficiency were achieved through the intercept term of their single-covariate
logistic regression equation. The variance about the intercept parameter was halved when the
General Fertility Rate constraint was introduced. Since the covariate-specific probabilities are
functions of the intercept parameters, the reduction in variance in the constrained model was
similarly large (around 50%) for the covariate-specific birth probabilities. Handcock et al did
not, however, use any population-level information on fertility rates by model covariates, and so
gains were confined to the intercept parameter and functions of it. The present article extends the
Handcock et al results to consider possible gains in efficiency and unbiasedness additionally for
the coefficient parameters of regression equations. In Section 2 immediately below, we describe
the statistical theory of variance and bias reduction for the constrained maximum likelihood
estimator, with particular application to logistic regression. In Section 3, we describe how this
estimator may be used in a sociological application that combines panel survey data with

5

population data on black and white marital fertility in a test of the minority-group status
hypothesis of fertility. In Section 4 the results are presented, followed by discussion in Section 5.
2. Statistical Theory
In this section we outline the statistical principles of variance and bias reduction when combining
survey and population data in a likelihood framework. The exposition is oriented towards the
type of estimators and assumptions about the nature of the survey and population data of our
subsequent empirical application. We describe the theory of constrained MLE for survey data
that are subject to varying degrees and types of non-response and attrition when exact
population-level data are available to constrain the regression estimates. Further, we describe
implementation with constraints on the weighted sum of conditional probabilities when the
weights may be known from either population or survey data or both, and when the
unconditional probabilities are known from population-level data. The basic principles also apply
to non-likelihood-based regression methods such as least squares and method of moment
estimators. We make reference to these generalities in the course of the exposition.
2.1 Representative Survey Data Combined with Exact Population Values
In this section, we consider what improvements could be achieved by combining survey data that
are representative of our target population with accurate population-level data. To say that the
survey data are ‘representative’ corresponds in the terminology of missing data to “ignorable”
non-response (Rubin 1976), encompassing as special cases standard survey designs where data
are ‘non-missing’, ‘missing completely at random’, ‘missing at random’, or subject to ‘covariate
only missingness’. We say that the population data are ‘accurate’ to mean that they are without
substantial non-sampling error such as undercounting or misclassification. Because they are
collected for all members of a target demographic population, we assume that they are
statistically precise (that is, not subject to sampling error). In this section we show how the
population values may be used to reduce sampling variance about survey estimates. We give a
formula (equation 8 below) for the reduction in variances about the regression parameters, and
that demonstrates that the standard errors of the estimates when using the population information
will always be lower than when this information is ignored. This formula applies to the reduction
in standard errors on both the intercept and coefficient parameters in the regression.
We start by writing the joint distribution of a response Y and covariates X as
P(Y = y , X = x | θ0 ) = P(Y = y | X = x, θ 0 ) P( X = x ) ,
(1)
where θ 0 is the unknown parameter vector of interest describing the relationship between
Y and X . The covariates X include the target and control variables. These may, for example, be
the regression parameters in a logistic or probit regression of Y on X . Suppose the universe
consists of women within a given range of childbearing ages, and that the response variableY has
two levels: 0 denotes no birth, and 1 denotes a birth, during the year [t -1, t ). Suppose further
that the only covariate in this model is a dichotomous “pre-marital children” variable X for
whether there are any children from before this marriage in the family unit at time t − 1 . The
binomial logistic regression model for the birth probability P(Y = 1 | X = x, θ 0 ) is given by:
logit[P(Y = 1 | X = x,θ 0 )] = θ1 + θ 2 x.

6

(2)

Here the parameter is θ 0 = (θ1 , θ 2 ) . Denote the survey data by D = (y i , x i ), i=1, ..., n. If this is all
the information we have, under standard regularity conditions, the value of θ that maximizes the
likelihood

L(θ ; y , x ) =

n

∏ P(Y = yi , X = xi | θ ) =
i =1

n

∏ P(Y =
i =1

yi | X = xi , θ ) P( X = xi )

(3)

is an asymptotically efficient estimator of θ 0 . Under these conditions, the estimator is also
asymptotically unbiased and Gaussian with asymptotic variance Vs , where Vs is the inverse of
Eθ0 [∂ log[ L(θ ; y | x )] / ∂θ ij ] , the Fisher information matrix for θ (Rice 1995). Note that as the

sampled distribution of the covariates does not depend on θ 0 the same estimator is produced by
maximizing the constrained likelihood
n

L(θ ; y | x ) = ∏ P(Y = yi | X = xi , θ ).

(4)

i =1

Intuitively this means that information about the population distribution of the covariates does
not effect the estimator. Thus population information about a function of X alone would not
improve the estimation of θ 0 .
Now suppose that we supplement the survey data by population information about some
function of the response and covariate variables, which we denote by g ( y, x ) . The function may
be univariate, bivariate, or multivariate if information about multiple characteristics is available.
As the information tells us something about Y or how Y and X relate to each other we might
expect that it will also help us infer the value of θ 0 . We assume that the information can be
expressed as a mean of a multi-dimensional function over the population:
C (θ0 ) = Eθ0 [ g (Y , X )]
(5)
where the value of C (θ 0 ) is known from the population data to be φ , say. Most information can
be expressed in this form by a judicious choice of g ( y, x ) . Returning to the example, consider
the above model for birth probabilities in terms of presence of pre-marital children. Population
data supply the annual probability of childbearing among all married couples in that wife’s age
group, φ . Survey data provide the proportion of couples with and without pre-marital children,
ρ = P( X = 1) and 1 − ρ = P( X = 0) . By choosing
⎧1 y = 1
g ( y, x) = ⎨
,
⎩0 y ≠ 1
and using the above expressions for the covariate-specific birth probabilities, the constraint (5)
is:
P(Y = 1 | X = 0, θ 0 )(1 − ρ ) + P (Y = 1 | X = 1, θ 0 ) ρ = φ
(6)
In general, a constraint for covariates x and dependent variable y is of the form:
C (θ ) = Eθ [ g (Y , X )] =

∫∫ g ( y, x ) P(Y = y

| X = x, θ ) P ( X = x )dydx

xy

7

(7)

If the marginal distribution of the covariate X , P( X = x), is known then this constraint is a
known function of θ . Hence (5) constrains this function of θ to equal its known population
value φ . If we maximize the likelihood (4) subject to this constraint using the procedure
described in Handcock, Huovilainen, and Rendall (2000), the estimator is still asymptotically
efficient, unbiased and Gaussian. However, while the asymptotic variance in the unconstrained
version is given by the Fisher information matrix VS , in the constrained version, the asymptotic
variance is:
VC = VS - VS H T [HVS H T ] -1 HVS
(8)
where H = ⎡⎣ ∂Ci (θ ) / ∂θ j ⎤⎦ is the gradient matrix of C(θ ) with respect to θ . As the second term
in this expression is positive definite, the inclusion of the population information always leads to
an improvement in the estimation of θ 0 . In particular, the standard error of the estimator in the
version using the population information (the constrained model) will always be less than the one
that ignores it (the unconstrained model). A further result of (8) is that the asymptotic ratio of the
variances of the constrained to unconstrained parameters is independent of the survey sample
size. Thus, the percentage reduction in the standard errors of the regression parameters will be
approximately the same for all sample sizes.
Importantly also, both VS and H in (8) can be estimated from the survey data using the
unconstrained model. Then the efficiency gain from including population information can be
estimated before running a constrained model, and so before obtaining the population data.
Alternative choices for g ( y, x ) can then be compared in terms of their statistical efficiency and
ease of collection of the population information. Note that the increase in efficiency from
including population data will be reduced if the population distribution of the covariates is not
known. Typically in demographic applications, the population data will provide information
about the univariate or bivariate distributions of at least some of the covariates, but survey data
will be needed to provide information about the multivariate dimensions of the covariate vector.
[Figure 1 about here]
The effect of including the population data can be understood graphically in Figure 1.
This is a stylized representation of the relative positions in a two-dimensional parameter space of
the various models. The target population model is represented by θ 0 . The dashed curves are the
contours of the unconstrained likelihood (3) with the maximum likelihood estimator using only
the sample survey represented by θMLE. The models satisfying the constraints (5) on the
parameters imposed by the population data are represented by the thick line. Note that θ 0 is
always on this line if the population data are from the target population. The constrained MLE
θCMLE is the value on this line that maximizes the likelihood subject to the constraints. The
variance formulas given above show that θCMLE is, on average, closer to θ 0 than θMLE. The exact
size of the improvement depends on constraints, but is calculable from (8) for given g ( y, x ) ,
independently of the actual value of the constraint φ. Because the survey data are representative,
though, the expected values of both the constrained and unconstrained parameters are equal to
the population parameter θ 0 . The gains realized through the introduction of the population data

8

will be in variance reduction only, as the unconstrained estimator is already unbiased with
respect to the target population.
It is worthwhile to be explicit about the situation where the survey suffers from nonresponse but is still assumed to be representative. The simplest case is where the values of D that
are missing are a simple random sample from the complete sample This is known as the missing
completely at random condition (Little and Rubin 1987). Denote the observed part of D by Dobs,
and the missing part by Dmis so that D=( Dobs, Dmis). As the mechanism that determines which
values are missing is independent of the response, covariates and θο, the likelihood for the data is
just the product (3) taken over the observed cases. In addition, the constrained MLE is still
asymptotically unbiased, efficient and Gaussian. The asymptotically efficiency for the observed
data relative to the complete data is just the proportion of the complete data that is missing.
Hence the inclusion of the population data has the same rate of increase in efficiency is it has in
the complete data case.
This assumption can be weakened to allow values to be missing differentially by
covariates, but independent of the response and of the vector of parameters θ 0 relating the
response variable to the regressors. We call this covariate only non-response (Rubin 1977). In
our example, this would mean that childless women might have a different response rate to
women who had at least one child at time t -1 , as long as the rate was the same of all women in
each category regardless of their birth status during the year. That is, the reason for non-response
is then perfectly related to the measured covariates. As the constrained likelihood is expressed in
terms of the conditional distributions P (Y = yi | X = xi , θ ), and these are unchanged, the
likelihood for the data is again just the product (3) taken over the observed cases. Thus even
though the observed sample distributions of the covariates are biased, the inclusion of the
population information is unaffected and the constrained MLE is asymptotically unbiased,
efficient and Gaussian. The asymptotic efficiency for the observed data relative to the complete
data is again just the proportion of the complete data cases that is missing.
Suppose now that the non-response also depends on the response Y . Suppose also that
the probability that an observation is missing may depend on Dobs but not on the missing part
Dmis. This is known as missing at random, in the sense of Rubin (1976). This is less restrictive
than covariate only non-response, which is in turn less restrictive than missing completely at
random. Missing at random allows the probability that a datum is missing to depend on the
response and covariate of the datum itself, but only indirectly through the quantities that are
observed. Let us assume that the parameters of the non-response mechanism are distinct from the
parameters of interest θο. If both the missing at random and the distinctness conditions hold, then
the missing-data mechanism is said to be ignorable (Little and Rubin 1987). This is an important
concept, because we can still model an ignorable non-response mechanism as a function of what
we have observed and obtain efficient inference for θ 0 . Finally note that this assumption, like all
those made about missing data, can not be verified from the observed data alone; support must
come from expertise or information external to the data. For example, we might know from other
studies that women’s marital fertility by pre-marital fertility does not differ by whether they
respond to surveys, even if, say, women with no pre-marital fertility are less likely to respond.
If there is non-response, the observed information includes not only the observed values of the
response and covariates, but also a variable R indicating if the case was observed or not. Hence
the likelihood for the observed data is the joint likelihood for Dobs and R. However, if the
missing data mechanism is ignorable, the joint likelihood is:

9

L(θ ; yobs , xobs , R ) = P ( R | Y = yobs , X = xobs ) P(Y = yobs | X = xobs , θ )

(9)
= P ( R | Y = yobs , X = xobs ) L(θ ; yobs | xobs ).
The first term is independent of θ so the likelihood is proportional to the constrained
likelihood for the observed values of the response and covariates. Hence the MLE is just the
constrained MLE under L(θ ; yobs | xobs ) , independent of the missing data mechanism. That is,
under our approach we can achieve fully efficient inference without modeling the missing data
mechanism explicitly for likelihood-based inference about θο. The constrained MLE
under L(θ ; yobs | xobs ) is asymptotically unbiased, efficient and Gaussian. The asymptotical
efficiency for the observed data relative to the complete data is just the proportion of the
complete data that is missing. Hence again the inclusion of the population data has the same rate
of increase in efficiency as it has in the complete data case.

2.2

Non-representative Survey Data Combined with Exact Population Values

In this section, we consider what improvements could be achieved using accurate populationlevel data to supplement ‘non-representative’ survey data, meaning survey data that are less than
perfectly representative of the population on at least one dimension related to the estimation
problem. In missing data terminology, the effective survey sampling mechanism then
incorporates non-response that is no longer ignorable. The statistical properties of estimators that
combine non-representative survey data with exact population values, however, apply more
broadly than to the case of ‘non-ignorable’ survey non-response. They can be extended also to
respondent misreporting (Schafer 1997) and to survey sampling designs that do not match
exactly to the target population.
The main result of using constraints from the target population in combination with the above
kinds of survey data is that the more population information we introduce, in the form of
constraints about the relationship between Y and X, the closer we will get to unbiased regression
estimates of target population relationships. We describe this below in terms of the synthetic
population that is formed by the combination of elements from both the representative and nonrepresentative effective sampling frames respectively from the population-level and survey data.
The inclusion of population constraints moves this synthetic population towards the target
population. The more constraints used, the closer is the synthetic population to the target
population, and the greater the reductions in bias about parameters estimated from this synthetic
population.
[Figure 2 about here]
Formally, following Little and Wu (1991) and Hellerstein and Imbens (1999), we refer to the
survey data’s distribution as the sampled population, with parameter θsample. We distinguish this
from the target population, with parameter θο. The maximum likelihood estimator will approach
θsample. If the survey is representative, then θsample = θο; otherwise the difference between them
represents the bias of the sample survey. The inclusion of population information will, in
general, reduce this bias. Suppose we use the constrained MLE to estimate θο. Consider the
synthetic population which satisfies the constraints (5) defined by the population data and that is
closest to θsample in terms of likelihood (see Figure 2). This population is in a sense a combination

10

of the sampled population and the target population. We denote the parameter for this synthetic
population by θcombined. The constrained MLE θCMLE will approach θcombined, as the sample size
increases, rather than the true value θο. Thus the difference between θcombined and θο is a measure
of the bias that remains after introducing population constraints. In this sense it is the bias of the
combined survey and population information. In general θcombined will be closer to the true value
θο than θsample, so the inclusion of the population data improves the estimates. The development
of the properties of the constrained MLE in Section 2.1 still applies, with θο now replaced by
θcombined. In particular, the variance formulas given above now apply for θCMLE, which is, on
average, closer to θο than is θMLE. Hellerstein and Imbens (1999) derive these results in the
special case of linear regression.
Computational limitations for the maximization problem may be encountered when many
population constraints are simultaneously applied. To circumvent this problem, the poststratification reweighting approach of Hellerstein and Imbens can be used. Those authors
demonstrate the equivalence between the constrained estimation and the reweighting approaches
in the linear regression context. They show that the empirical likelihood MLE can be expressed
as a weighted linear regression estimator, where the weights are a by-product of calculating the
MLE, and can be interpreted as post-stratification weights. This approach has the major
advantage that once the weights are calculated, the weighted dataset can be used within standard
statistical packages, and interpreted accordingly. Both the constrained methods and the
reweighting methods lead to identical estimators. The choice of method can then be made on the
basis of ease of programming and statistical computational efficiency.
Misreporting of respondents can be statistically treated in a similar way to non-ignorable
non-response. It requires the modeling of the misreporting mechanism just as the non-response is
modeled. Even parameters of the misreporting (i.e., the misreporting probability) can be included
as parameters. A good example is Heitjan and Rubin’s (1989) treatment of respondents rounding
of answers (e.g. age, income). See also Heitjan (1990) for a review of these methods.
2.3

Application to logistic regression

Let Y be a binary response variable modeled via a logistic regression on covariates
X = { X 1 , X 2, ..., X q } :
q

logit[P(Y = 1 | X 1 = x1 , X 2 = x2 ..., X q = xq , θ0 )] = ∑θ 0 k xk .

(10)

k =1

The responses are assumed to be conditionally independent given the covariates. We next
introduce constraints on the total effects of each variable. Let φij be the proportion of positive
responses (Y=1) in the population with X i = j . The corresponding constraint functions Cij (θ )
are each of the form:

φij = Cij (θ ) = Eθ [ gij (Y , X )] =

∑ P(Y = 1 | X = x, θ ) π ( X = x

x: xi = j

where
⎧1
gij ( y , x ) = ⎨
⎩0

y = 1 and xi = j
otherwise

11

| Xi = j)

(11)

The constraint function (11) is expressed as the sum over of two product terms (on the right hand
side of the constraint function). The first term is the probability of a positive response conditional
on the value of the regressor vector x. The second term is the proportion of the population with a
specific set of values on the regressor variables given that X i = j .
Consider now the case in which there is a constraint function defined for each possible
value j that variable Xi may take. For example, X1 may be a “race” variable that takes the value of
X1 = 0 for whites and X1 = 1 for blacks. Continuing this example, let response variable Y indicate
whether a birth occurs in the year. Then {φ11, φ10} represents the bivariate association of race
with fertility in the population of whites and blacks. For example, φ11 / φ10 expresses the ratio of
black to white fertility. The two constraint functions C(θ11) and C(θ10) then together constrain the
marginal effects in the behavioral model to preserve this overall ratio of black to white fertility
that is known from the population data. When a set of constraints of this type is applied, so that
for a given regression variable X i its bivariate association with Y is completely specified for the
population, we say that the regression variable X i has been directly constrained. For other
variables in the equation, we say they are indirectly constrained, since each constraint potentially
influences every parameter value via the interrelationships between the covariates. Hence a
direct constraint on one variable indirectly influences the values of the other parameters. These
indirect effects are expected to be larger if the covariates are closely related. For example, if a
variable is an interaction between a directly constrained and another variable, it may be
significantly influenced even if it is not directly constrained itself. The magnitude of any
resulting reductions in variance and bias is one of the subjects of our empirical investigation
reported in the results section below.
In general, the population proportions π ( X = x | X i = j ) may be estimated from survey
or population data, or a combination of the two. Estimating them from the survey data is useful
to ensure conformity of the variable definitions between the first and second terms on the right
hand side of the constraint equation, but does introduce a source of variability in the constraint
function. It is possible to modify equation (8) to include a component due to this uncertainty. The
constrained estimator is still used, but with the constraint functions conditional on the
distribution of the regressors estimated from survey data. Let g ( x;θ ) = EY |X = x ;θ [ g (Y , x )] be the
conditional expectation of g (Y , X ) given X = x . The variation of g ( X ;θ ) determines the
variation in the constraints. The variance of the constrained estimator is given by Imbens and
Lancaster (1994):
VCU =[VS-1 + H T ∆ −g1H]-1 = VS - VS H T [HVS H T +∆ g ]-1HV
where ∆ g is the covariance matrix of g ( X ;θ 0 ) . Compared to equation (8), it can be seen that

∆ g represents the cost of not knowing π ( X = x | X i = j ) and this inflates the variance of the
estimator. When ∆ g is close to zero, that is the constraint right hand side varies little from sample
to sample, the two formulas are very close. The effect of using sample data to estimate
population proportions π ( X = x | X i = j ) , however, is to unambiguously reduce the
effectiveness of constrained estimation. By just how much will vary from application to
application, but can be quantified for known or hypothetical ∆ g via this formula.

12

3. A Constrained MLE Test of the Minority-Group Status Hypothesis of Fertility
The example introduced above in the context of the theoretical properties of constrained
maximum likelihood estimators can now be elaborated and estimated. Specifically, we consider a
test of the “minority-group status” hypothesis of couple fertility. We demonstrate the constrained
maximum likelihood method by testing this hypothesis on the marital fertility of black and white
couples in which the wife is aged between 30 and 34 years old. According to the minority-group
status hypothesis, fertility will be lower for a minority group of otherwise equal economic status
(Goldscheider and Uhlenberg 1969). In previous tests of the hypothesis applied to minority black
versus majority white women (Johnson 1988; Boyd 1994), the strength of empirical support for
the hypothesis has varied. Our test of the minority group hypothesis is confined to the 30 to 34
year-old age group for simplicity of statistical estimation and testing. While limiting the age
range in this way will mix childbearing quantity with timing effects, we include regressors that
control for timing associations.
The minority-group status theory of fertility differentials was originally proposed when
fertility within marriage predominated among both majority and minority groups. Thus it is
appropriate for us to apply the hypothesis to marital fertility. Johnson’s finding that higher
educated black women’s lower fertility may be partly due to their higher rates of divorce also
argues for separate consideration of marital fertility. It is important, however, to take into
account the potentially confounding effect of fertility before the marriage began. This may be
non-marital fertility, either with her current husband or with a previous partner. It may also be
fertility within a previous marriage. In either case, we expect and find that this depresses fertility
in the current marriage. Because, as we show, pre-marital fertility is substantially more common
among black married women than among white married women, it is important to include a
control for any pre-marital children in addition to other socio-demographic and economic
variables.
We obtain the bivariate associations between race and fertility from the population data:
the race- and year-specific marital fertility rates for 30 to 34 year old women from 1984 to 1993.
The population data are the National Center for Health Statistics’ (NCHS 1999) published
estimates of annual marital fertility rates by five-year age group and race of the woman. The
NCHS makes these estimates by using as their numerator, all marital births in the given year
1984 to 1993 to married mothers of that racial group2, and by using as their denominator the
Census Bureau’s mid-year population estimates by sex, age, and marital status. We assume the
marital age-, period- and race-specific fertility rates have zero sampling variance, and that the
age, race, and period definitions are those of the target population for our analyses. That is, we
assume the NCHS data represent the true population values exactly.
In general, when jointly using survey and population data, there will seldom be an exact
match between the population and survey universes and variable definitions. In the present study,
we specify the population about which we wish to make inferences on the basis of the population
data, and use the survey data to best approximate that. This allows us to explore empirically the
statistical properties of the case described above in terms of statistical theory. This is the case in
which the population values are known exactly and the sample may or may not have been drawn
(or have subsequently evolved) in a way that can be said to exactly represent that target
population.
2

In general, these are 100% samples, but some states provide 50% samples for the national compilation by NCHS,
who then weight them to the population total.

13

The survey data we use are from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID, Hill 1992).
These data have the advantages of coming from a very long-running panel survey with covariates
for socio-economic and demographic variables available for each year. For the present study, it is
especially advantageous to have economic status measured directly each year with an income
variable. We make estimates for the years 1984 to 1993. The latter year is the most recent year
for which “final release” files, including generated variables such as the family income-topoverty ratio, were available from the Survey Research Center when we coded our survey data.
The PSID sample uses an unequal probability sample design. We account for this by conducting
our estimation with the PSID’s individual sample weights. Thus we account for both initial
sample design effects and some of the biases introduced by attrition. The PSID’s sampled
population may, however, have drifted away from target population universe over time, through
differential attrition (Fitzgerald, Gottschalk, and Moffitt 1998), and through its not capturing the
processes of population change through immigration. We interpret such drift in terms of bias
with respect to the target population.
The universe consists of years of exposure to marital fertility in the period 1984 to 1993
among white and black married couples in which the wife is aged 30 to 34 years old. The survey
data were collected at annual intervals late in the year, with age recorded in completed years at
last birthday. Using these data to best approximate our calendar-year universe, we select our
sample to consist of all survey year-pairs (t -1, t ] in which the wife was aged from 29 to 34 in
year t − 1 , and hence aged 30 to 35 in year t . The part-year exposure while still aged 29 is then
balanced by part-year exposure at age 35. The matching of survey period to calendar year is done
at year t of the (t - 1, t ] survey period, since the survey data are collected late in each year, and
thus the majority of exposure in each (t -1, t ] year occurs during calendar year t . Married
couples each contribute up to six couple-years of exposure in the 1984 to 1993 period. This
results in a sample of 8,266 person-years. We ignore variance-estimation complications due to
the repeated observation of individuals in the panel. Because we use the same data for both the
constrained and unconstrained estimates, introducing this further complication should not change
our main results.
The variables from the PSID that are used in the regression are as follows. The dependent
variable Y has two levels: 0 denotes no birth, and 1 denotes a birth to the couple, during the
year (t -1, t ] . Using the PSID’s panel data only, we code a birth when a child aged less than two
has entered the family unit since the previous year. This assumes that the parents and child live
together at the survey interview immediately following the birth, and that infant mortality
between birth and survey is zero. Improvements to the accuracy of coding of births could
presumably be achieved through supplementing the panel data with the PSID’s fertility histories.
For the present study’s methodological objectives, though, the panel data are sufficient.
Next, we consider the explanatory variables. A fully-specified model of the determinants of
the marital birth event would include a variety of demographic, economic, and sociological
variables influencing the probability of a birth in the year. The demographic variables might
include the single-year ages of both the wife and the husband, length of the marriage, number of,
and years since, previous births within this marriage, for this couple (allowing for children born
to the couple before they married), and outside this couple. The economic variables might
include the husband’s and the wife’s current and opportunity wages (the latter affected by
education and years of working experience), and the couple’s net worth. Sociological variables,
such as religious affiliation and behavior, and attitudes towards marriage and family, might also
be included. Our intention in this example is to include a reduced set of these variables that is
14

sufficient to illustrate the statistical issues and advantages when using constrained MLE as
opposed to the usual, unconstrained technique.
As proxies for a full set of demographic variables, we include single-year durations of
marriage up to 10 years and over, and whether the age of any child in the current family unit is
greater than the duration of the marriage (a “pre-marriage children” variable). As a proxy for a
full set of economic variables, we include dummies for the family’s tercile income-to-poverty
ratio. This defines lower, middle, and upper-income married couples of this age group. The cut
points are at 3.15 and 5.16 times the PSID’s approximation of the official poverty ratio. Since the
poverty ratio is determined by size of family, this also proxies partially for that demographic
variable. As a proxy for sociological variables that have changed over time, including attitudes to
marriage and the family, we include single-year period dummies for 1984 to 1993. These period
dummies will, of course, proxy also for changes in other unobserved variables, including
contemporary labor-market conditions.
Finally, race of the couple is coded from the “race of the Family Unit Head” variable in the
PSID. A more complete model would allow for the race of the husband and wife to differ, but
again, our simplification is adequate for illustrative purposes. Race is also interacted fully with
each of the year dummies and with the dummy for whether there are any pre-marital children.
The choice of these particular interactions is more for the purposes of illustration than for
substantive or model-fitting reasons. The year dummies are interacted with race because the
population data allows us to do so very precisely. The “pre-marital children” variable allows us
to explore the effect of interacting a variable for which the population data do not provide direct
information, with a variable (race) that is more directly constrained. We explore the effect of
constraints on the black dummy and its interactions with pre-marital children and period, under
different model specifications and sample sizes. A major focus of our study is the improvements
of estimation and inference with respect to the directly-constrained coefficients for race and raceby-year interactions, as it is these that allow us to test the minority-group hypothesis of fertility.
Formally, the covariates in this model are represented by the vector x , measured at
time t − 1 . The binomial logit model for the birth probability P(Y=1|X=x, θο) is given by
equation (10). In the unconstrained case, we use the survey data alone to estimate the value of
θ 0 that maximizes the unconstrained log-likelihood. We next introduce constraint functions. Let
φtr be the NCHS fertility rate for black and white couples’ ( r = 0, 1, respectively) in year
t = 1984,…1993. These fertility rates are used to constrain the black and white couples’ annual
probabilities of a marital birth. The 20 constraint functions C tr (θ ) are each of the form seen in
equation (11) above:

φtr = Ctr (θ ) =

∑

P (Y = y | X = x, θ ) π ( X = x | year = t , race = r )

(12)

x: year = t , race = r

Thus the constraint functions are of the form in which the value of the dependent variable is
known exactly for race and period subpopulations of the overall population of 30 to 34 year-old
married women. The bivariate association of race with fertility is then implicitly constrained for
all married 30-34 year-old women in any given year. The first term on the right hand side of the
constraint function is the probability of a birth in year t conditional on the value of the regressor
vector x. The second term is the proportion of the population of that race in year t with a specific
set of values for the regressor variables. Here, it is the proportion of the population with a
specific number of years marital duration, presence or absence of pre-marital children, and
15

family income-to-poverty tercile (that is, values on the regressors that are not directly
constrained). We estimate those proportions from the survey data. In a simple specification of the
model from our example problem, variance reduction in the estimation of our parameter interest
(the coefficient on the black dummy) was little changed when variability about the regressor
distribution was accounted for ----down from a 98.4% reduction over the unconstrained
estimate’s variance to a 97.0% reduction . Variance reduction in the intercept parameter,
however, was more substantially affected----down from a 94.9% reduction to only a 73.2%
reduction. For simplicity, the results presented below do not account for this source of variability
in the estimates of variance reduction.
The maximum likelihood estimator under the constraints is the solution of:

max[ L(θ ; y | x )] subject to Ctr (θ ) = φtr t = 1,…10, r = 0,1
θ

The estimator is asymptotically efficient, unbiased and Gaussian with covariance matrix
approximated by (8). To evaluate the gains obtained by imposing constraints from the population
data, we estimate both the unconstrained and constrained versions of our model, and compare the
parameters and their standard errors.
We implement our constrained ML estimator using the PROC NLP procedure of the
SAS/OR package (SAS Institute 1997). This procedure allows for a wide range of objective
functions and for a large number of either linear or non-linear constraints. In the present, logistic
regression case, the constraints are non-linear due to the non-linearity in the logistic cumulative
density function. The NLP procedure also calculates the covariance matrix and standard errors,
using the standard asymptotic approximation of the inverse of the Fisher information matrix. The
NLP procedure is relatively simple to implement, and converges within a reasonable time (under
two hours CPU time) for the specification presented here. In more complex specifications with
larger survey samples, however, more flexible and efficient programming implementations may
be required.3
4. Results
Comparisons between the population and survey estimates of the annual marital fertility for
white and black married women aged 30 to 34 are shown in Figures 3 and 4 for the years 1984 to
19934. Here, as throughout the analyses, the survey estimates are weighted. The degree of
fluctuation due to sampling error is high for both races. This is seen both in the confidence
intervals that are plotted with the point estimates, and in comparison with the population rates.
The population rates show clear upward trends, and very little fluctuation from year to year, for
both whites and blacks. The upward trends are not clearly visible in the highly-fluctuating survey
rates. Several features stand out when comparing the white and black rates. First, the black
fertility rates in the survey fluctuate more than the white fertility rates. This is as expected given
the smaller sample sizes of married black women----approximately 250 person-years of exposure

3

The main programming disadvantage of the NLP procedure is that it does not allow for the specification of the
constraint function in matrix form. Thus it becomes unwieldy when the number of possible regressor-vector values
to sum over becomes large.
4
Strictly, the annual probability of a birth is estimated in the PSID, but this is equivalent to an annual fertility rate
due to the negligible mortality at the childbearing ages.

16

per year, compared to married white women's approximately 600 person-years of exposure per
year.
Second, while the black survey rates fluctuate both above and below the population rates,
the white survey rates appear to be systematically higher than the population rates. In each of the
ten years, the white survey point estimate is above the population rate, and in six the white
population rate lies below the lower limit of the survey estimate confidence interval. In only two
years does the black population rate lie outside the survey rate confidence interval. Thus the
white survey rates exhibit strong evidence of upward bias, while the black survey rates show
little apparent bias. This finding is important for the statistical testing of the minority-group
hypothesis, as it could induce a spurious finding of lower marital fertility among black women,
one that is due to bias in the sample of white women.
Third, in both the population and survey rates, the marital fertility of blacks is
substantially lower than that of whites. This is seen clearly in the population rates, in which the
black rates are consistently lower by about 20 percent. The black rates increase from an annual
rate of .0675 in 1984 to .0796 in 1993, while white rates increase from .0830 to .1004 in the
same period. These differences are the population estimates of the bivariate association of race
and fertility. While this direction of differences is consistent with the minority-group hypothesis,
before drawing a conclusion it is necessary to control for socio-economic covariates that may
depress black marital fertility rates relative to those of whites of the same age group.
[Figures 3 and 4 about here]
Overall, these results show that married black women have substantially lower fertility
than do white married women of the same age group. For the minority-group hypothesis to be
supported, however, we should find that black women’s fertility is substantially lower after
controlling for socio-demographic and economic variables. To do so, we allow the survey data to
contribute information on pre-marital children, on duration of the current marriage, and on the
economic condition of the family. After including these demographic and socio-economic
control variables, the coefficient for the race variable together with dummies for the interaction
of race by year provide a test of the minority-group hypothesis.
The distributions of blacks and whites on the covariates, and the proportions giving birth
by covariate and race, are shown in Table 1. Black women are likely to have been married fewer
years (29.1% fewer than 5 years, compared to 23.0% of white couples). They are much more
likely to have a child present from before the marriage (19.7%, compared to only 7.5% of white
couples). They are also much more likely to be in the lower income-to-poverty tercile (50.3%,
compared to 31.1% of white couples), and much less likely to be in the upper income tercile
(16.7%, compared to 35.3% of white couples).
Two of these racial covariate distributions point to black couples having lower birth
probabilities than white couples, and one points in the reverse direction. Having a pre-marital
child and being in lower income categories are associated with substantially lower probabilities
of giving birth: 0.035 with a pre-marital child compared to 0.116 without a pre-marital child; and
0.074 in the lower income category compared to 0.152 in the higher income category. Birth
probabilities are higher, however, at shorter marital durations (the third and fourth years being
the peaks), with the exception of the first year of the marriage. The lower marital fertility rates of
30 to 34 year-old married black women that are seen in the population data, therefore, may be
due to socio-economic covariate differences by race, and not to a “minority-group status” effect.

17

Hence, as proposed by the minority-group hypothesis, it is necessary to control for these
covariates to assess whether there is a depressing effect of minority status on fertility.
[Table 1 about here]
We estimate the model with socio-economic covariates under two regression
specifications, alternately including and excluding the income variables (see Table 2). In both
models, we control for marriage duration and presence of a pre-marital child when estimating the
year-by-year effects of being black on having a birth. For each specification, we estimate the
models alternately in their unconstrained and constrained versions. Comparing the specifications
alternately with and without the income-to-poverty variables, a test of increase in the loglikelihood reveal that in both the unconstrained and constrained versions, inclusion of the
income-to-poverty variables improves the fit (p<.001). The values of the log-likelihood for each
equation are given in Table 2. As the standard errors for these parameters are trivially reduced by
introducing constraints, it follows that the test for improving the model fit is almost identical
when comparing the two specifications in the constrained models versus in the unconstrained
models.
Our main focus is on the differences between the unconstrained and constrained
estimates. As described in the theory section, the parameters can be divided into those that are
directly constrained and those that are not. The former category consists of the year variables, the
black variable, and the black-by-year interactions. For each year, there are black and white
constraints. The difference between them measures the bivariate association of race with fertility
in that particular year. For each year, there is also a survey variable whose regression coefficient
measures the marginal effect of being black in that particular year. Thus these variables fit our
definition from the theory section of having directly-constrained parameters. The category of
indirectly-constrained parameters consists of those for the pre-marital child, marital-duration,
and income-to-poverty variables, plus the variable for the interaction of black and pre-marital
child.
We consider first efficiency gains from constraining the survey estimates. Consistent with
the statistical theory presented above, the standard errors on all parameters are lower in the
constrained equation than in the corresponding unconstrained equation. For the variables that are
directly constrained, the reductions in standard errors are extremely large. For the year dummies,
the reductions are by factors of more than 15, while for the black-by-year interactions, the
reductions are by factors of up to 30. The reductions in standard errors about the black variable
are by factors of about 9. Accordingly, the magnitudes of the coefficients for the year dummies
and black-by-year interactions vary much less over the 1985 to 1994 period in the constrained
model than in the unconstrained model.
[Table 2 about here]
The reductions in standard errors are of trivial magnitudes, however, for all indirectlyconstrained variables, in all cases by less than 1 percent. Noteworthy here is that even for the
interaction variable between black and non-marital child, the standard error is reduced by less
than 1 percent. This negligible reduction is in spite of the strong correlation between being black
(a directly-constrained variable) and having a pre-marital child (seen above). This example

18

points to the likelihood that any reductions in the standard errors of other than directly
constrained variables in sociological research will be very modest.5
The intercept parameter is a special category. It is subject to a direct constraint, that of the
fertility rate of the reference white group in the reference year 1984. However, the intercept
parameter measures more than just an implicit marginal effect of being white in 1984, measuring
also the implicit marginal effects of being in the reference categories of the variables that are not
directly constrained. The reduction is by “only” one-third about the intercept variable. The
statistical interpretation here is that the intercept is related both to the directly constrained
variable (black versus white) and the unconstrained variables (marital duration and pre-marital
child and, in the second specification, also income level). The more indirectly-constrained
parameters there are in the model, the less will the intercept term be determined by the value of
the constraint on the reference year 1984 for reference race “white”. Comparing the
specifications alternately with and without the income-to-poverty variables is instructive here.
The reduction in the standard error about the intercept term is proportionately smaller when the
income-to-poverty variables are additionally included (by 25.4 percent, versus by 31.8 percent in
the model without the income-to-poverty variables). There are not, however, any substantial
differences in the directly-constrained parameters with the additional indirectly-constrained
parameters included. This is an important result, because the present study has used a simpler
specification of the socio-economic and demographic variables than would typically be used.
The finding of almost equally large reductions in the standard errors when further indirectlyconstrained regressors are added indicates that directly constraining a regressor of interest can
also be expected to yield very large efficiency gains in a fully-specified regression model.
We now proceed to evaluate the effects of these reductions in standard errors on our
statistical evaluation of the minority-group hypothesis. We do so for the model that includes the
income-to-poverty dummies. Because we have interaction dummies for nine years as well as a
black dummy, we can consider the minority hypothesis in each year. A measure of the black
minority-status effect for 1984 is the coefficient of the black dummy. For 1985-94 we can use
the sum of the coefficients of the black dummy and the black-by-year interaction dummy.
Together there are 10 statistical tests of the minority-group hypothesis that may be performed in
each equation. Each minority-group hypothesis can be evaluated using a t-test whose test statistic
is constructed by dividing the minority-status effect estimate by its standard error.6 We then
calculate confidence intervals around the estimate for each year. These are shown in Figure 5.
The unconstrained model estimates of the year-by-year black minority-status effect have large
confidence intervals around them, such that in no year is the estimate significantly different from
zero. While point estimates are relatively evenly spread between being above and below zero
(six above zero and four below zero), those below zero are further from zero, suggesting a
possible effect that the statistical test may not be powerful enough to detect. This suggestion is
supported by the results for the constrained model. Seven out of ten years has a point estimate
below zero, and six of these are statistically significant. Only one of the years (1984) sees a point
estimate that is above zero and statistically significant.

5

We further confirmed this finding in results not reported here in which we experimented with simulated data that
we created to have very high correlations between directly-constrained and other variables.
6
For 1985-94 the test statistics are the sum of two estimated coefficients and so the standard errors can be calculated
from a quadratic form in the appropriate variance-covariance matrix. This is VS in the unconstrained case and VC in
the constrained case.

19

[Figure 5 about here]
We next assess whether and by how much we have reduced bias by constraining the estimates.
As discussed in Section 2.2, the survey data is unbiased if θsample = θ0. We can test the overall
hypothesis of equality between these two parameter vectors using a Wald test statistic:
(θ MLE − θCMLE )T [VS − VC ]−1 (θ MLE − θCMLE )
which is asymptotically Chi-squared with degrees of freedom equal to the number of constraints.
For the model including the poverty variables the test statistic is 69.86. The p-value based on the
Chi-squared on 20 degrees of freedom is less than 0.001. Hence we can reject the null hypothesis
of no bias against the alternative of bias in at least one parameter. This result is unsurprising
given the comparisons between the sample and population fertility rates shown above for whites
in particular (Figure 3). In particular, it seemed that one reason that black marital fertility in the
PSID might be lower than white fertility is that the white fertility might have been upwardly
biased.
We calculate the bias as the log-odds of having a birth calculated from the constrained
model estimates minus the log-odds of having a birth calculated from the constrained model
estimates. This calculation of the log-odds is just the right hand side of equation (10). We
calculate this bias for the reference category on the other regressors, that is, no pre-marital child,
marital duration 4 years, and bottom tercile income-to-poverty ratio. We do this separately for
whites and blacks (see Figures 6 and 7).
[Figures 6 and 7 about here]
Returning to the results presented in Figure 3, we saw that there appeared to be a
tendency towards a downward effect on fertility in the unconstrained model, but one for which
the year-by-year statistical tests were not powerful enough to detect. One way of increasing the
power of the test is to consider an average of each of the annual effects. This permits an overall
test of the minority-group status hypothesis for the 1984 to 1993 period. We calculated the
average 'black' effect in the constrained and unconstrained models as the mean of the annual
differences in the log-odds, and calculated the standard error about this mean.7 The mean effects
are then -.375 (0.165 standard error, p=.02), or a 0.687 odds-ratio for the unconstrained model,
and -.128 (.0445 standard error, p=.004), or a 0.880 odds-ratio for the unconstrained model.
These are very good summary measures of the effect of constraining the survey estimates of the
marginal race effect to known population values of the overall race and fertility association. The
unconstrained model indicates that black marital fertility in this age group is as much as onethird lower than white marital fertility (in terms of odds of having a birth in the next year), after
controlling for socio-economic variables and variables for marital and fertility history. This
difference is statistically significant at the .05 level, but not at the .01 level. Thus although the
magnitude of the effect is apparently very high, the statistical test is only just powerful enough to
detect it. The constrained model indicates that the effect of black minority status is much smaller
---- a 12 percent lower odds than for whites of having a birth in the next year. The test for the
minority status effect, however, is a very powerful one. The standard error about the average

7

The average ‘black’ effect is a linear combination of the coefficients and its variance is then the corresponding
quadratic form in the variance-covariance matrix. See also footnote 5.

20

effect is only one-quarter that of the unconstrained model, and thus the relatively small
difference between black and white fertility is significant at the .004 level.
Finally, we conduct a test of whether the mean black effect (that is, the black log-odds
minus the white log-odds) estimated with the unconstrained model is biased. The standard error
of the difference in the mean black effect between unconstrained and the constrained models
(0.247) is 0.159, or a p-value of .060. Taking the constrained model's mean 'black' effect as
unbiased, we can say that the apparent upward bias in the unconstrained model's mean black
effect, estimated by comparing the mean effect between the unconstrained and constrained
models, is close to being statistically significant at the .05 level.
5. Summary and Discussion
We first described the statistical properties of the general constrained ML estimator. We then
illustrated its application with a particular type of constraint function in which the weighted sum
of all the covariate-specific associations (partial effects) of the regressors on the dependent
variable is constrained to equal the overall population association of one or more of the
regressors. We refer to those regressors whose bivariate or limited multivariate relationships with
the dependent variable are constrained by population data as being “directly constrained.” Our
study investigated the improvements in the estimation of directly-constrained variables, and also
the improvements in the estimation of other regressor variables that may be correlated with the
directly-constrained variables, and thus “indirectly-constrained” by the population data.
We then showed with an empirical example that partial effects estimated from survey
data may be re-estimated with a large reduction in variance by specifying population constraints
on their overall association with the dependent variable. As an example application, we tested the
minority-group status hypothesis of fertility on the marital fertility of black and white couples in
which the wife is aged between 30 and 34 years old. According to the minority-group hypothesis,
fertility will be lower for a minority group of otherwise equal economic status. The population
data are age-, year- and race-specific marital fertility rates calculated from birth-registration data
combined with census-based estimates of the married population by age and race. The survey
data are from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). These contribute additional
information on pre-marital children, on duration of the current marriage, and on the economic
condition of the family.
The standard errors about the directly-constrained coefficients were seen to be
substantially, even drastically reduced under constrained MLE as compared to under
unconstrained MLE. The indirectly-constrained coefficients, however, were changed negligibly
in both point estimate and standard error about the estimate. We also used the comparison
between constrained and unconstrained MLE to test for bias in the survey data, and found
evidence of upward bias for white couples but not for black couples. Thus we have shown that
the constrained MLE technique both provides a far more powerful statistical test of the minoritygroup hypothesis, and purges the test of a bias that would otherwise favor a finding in support of
the minority-group hypothesis. We also found still extremely large reductions in the standard
errors about the directly-constrained coefficients when further indirectly-constrained regressors
were added. This indicates that directly constraining a regressor of interest can be expected to
yield very large efficiency gains in a fully-specified regression model.
Substantively strong, but statistically weak support for the minority-group status
hypothesis is found in our estimates from the unconstrained version of our equation. The

21

conclusion from the constrained version is that a statistically-significant but substantively-small
minority-group effect is indicated. The difference in these conclusions from the point of view of
the sociologist is potentially very large. As we noted above, earlier tests of the hypothesis for
black versus white fertility have yielded mixed findings. These studies are not directly
comparable to the present study, due among other things to the restriction of the present study to
married women in their early 30s. Nevertheless, the results of the present study suggest that one
factor contributing to the mixed findings in previous studies may be weaknesses in the empirical
tests: either due to bias in the data for one or other of the black or white groups (as we found here
for whites); or due to the large sampling error that arises in testing in relatively small
subpopulations. It is indicative here that researchers more frequently turn to larger sample
datasets such as the Census PUMS when analyzing racial and ethnic differences (e.g., Bean and
Swicegood 1985), trading off sampling error for the problem of having fewer socio-economic
variables available to specify a behavioral model. In the present study, we direct sociologists to
an alternative approach that allows for the use of a smaller survey dataset and thus a more fully
specified behavioral model, but using known population relationships to greatly increase the
statistical power of the regression estimates.
As a caveat to the substantive finding here of a small minority-group status effect, the
relatively simple set of socio-economic regressors used here may have resulted in marital fertility
equations that are misspecified. If specification of the socio-economic variables were improved,
for example to include more demographic information on previous births (total parity, parity
within the present marriage, years since the previous birth) and/or to separate earnings of the
husband and earnings or opportunity wages of the wife, the effect of the black coefficients may
be reduced still further. In that case, we would be able to conclude against the operation of a
substantial minority-group effect using a much more powerful statistical test than that with
survey data only. The comparisons we made between the models estimated after adding more
socio-economic regressors (the income-to-poverty ratio dummies) indicates that little reduction
in statistical power would result from adding more regressors to the model.
Finally, we note that the statistical structure assumed for the population and survey data
here will not always be realistic. In particular, we assumed that the population constraints were
known exactly, in terms of both the associations of race and year with fertility (the marital
fertility rates provided by NCHS) and the distribution of the regressor variables (estimated here
from sample and not population data). Development and implementation of methods to account
for uncertainty also in the constraints is a further topic that should be explored.

22

References
Bean, F.D., and G. Swicegood (1985) Mexican American Fertility Patterns Austin:
University of Texas Press.
Bethlehem, J.G. (2002). Weighting nonresponse adjustments based on auxiliary
information, in “Survey Nonresponse,” Groves, R. M., Dillman, D. A., Eltinge, J. L., and Little,
R. J. A. Editors, pp. 289-302, Wiley: New York.
Boyd, R.L. (1994) Educational mobility and the fertility of black and white women: A
research note. Population Research and Policy Review 13(3):275-281.
Breslow, N.E. and Day, N.E. (1980). Statistical Methods in Cancer Research; Vol. 1, The
Analysis of Case-Control Studies. IARC: Lyon.
Deming, W. E., and Stephan, F. F. (1942) On the Least Squares Adjustment of a Sampled
Frequency Table When the Expected Marginal Tables are Known. The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics 11:427-424.
Elliott, M. R., and R. J. A. Little (2001) A Bayesian approach to combining information
from a census, a coverage measurement survey and demographic analysis Journal of the
American Statistical Association 95(450):351-362.
Fitzgerald, J., P. Gottschalk, and R. Moffitt. 1998. An analysis of sample attrition in the
Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics Journal of Human Resources 33:251-99.
Gelman, A. and Carlin, J. B. (2001) Poststratification and Weighting Adjustments, in
“Survey Nonresponse,” Groves, R. M., Dillman, D. A., Eltinge, J. L., and Little, R. J. A. Editors,
pp. 289-302, Wiley: New York
Gelman, A. and Little, T. C. (1998) Improving Upon Probability Weighting for
Household Size, Public Opinion Quarterly, 62, 398-404.
Goldscheider, C., and P.R. Uhlenberg (1969) Minority Group Status and Fertility
American Journal of Sociology 74:361-372.
Handcock, M.S., S.M. Huovilainen, and M.S. Rendall. Combining Registration-System
and Survey Data to Estimate Birth Probabilities Demography, 37(2):187-192.
Heitjan, D. F. (1990) Inference from Grouped Continuous Data; A Review (with
discussion). Statistical Science 4:164-183.
Heitjan, D. F., and Rubin, D. B. (1989) Inference from Coarse Data via Multiple
Imputation. Journal of the American Statistical Association 85(423):304-314.
Hellerstein, J., and G.W. Imbens (1999) Imposing moment restrictions from auxiliary
data by weighting Review of Economics and Statistics 81(1):1-14.
Hill, M.S. 1992. The Panel Study of Income Dynamics: A User's Guide. Newbury Park,
California: Sage.
Holt, D. and Smith T. F. M. (1979) Post-Stratification. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, Series A. 142:33-46.
Imbens, G.W., Johnson, P. and Spady, R.H. (1998) Information Theoretic Approaches to
Inference in Moment Condition Models, Econometrica 66: 333-59.
Imbens GW, Lancaster T. (1996) Efficient estimation and stratified sampling. Journal of
Econometrics 74 (2): 289-318.
Imbens, G.W. and T. Lancaster (1994) Combining micro and macro data in
microeconometric models. Review of Economic Studies 61: 655-680.
Ireland, C. T., and Kullback, S. (1968) Contingency tables with Given Marginals.
Biometrika 55:179-188.

23

Johnson, N.E. (1988) The pace of births over the life course: implications for the
minority-group status hypothesis Social Science Quarterly 69(1):95-107.
Kish, L. (1965) Survey Sampling New York: Wiley.
Little, R. J. A. (1991) Inference with Sample Weights, Journal of Official Statistics, 7,
405-424
Little, R. J. A. (1992) Regression with missing X’s : A review Journal of the American
Statistical Association 87(420):1227-1237.
Little, R. J. A. (1993) Post-stratification : A modeler’s perspective Journal of the
American Statistical Association 88(423):1001-1012.
Little, R. J. A. (1995) Missing data, in G. Arminger, C. C. Clogg, and M.E. Sobel (eds.)
Handbook of Statistical Modeling for the Social Sciences New York: Chapman Hall.
Little, R. J. A. and Rubin D. B. (1987) Statistical Analysis of Missing Data. New York:
John Wiley.
Little, R. J. A., and Wu, M. M. (1991) Models for Contingency Tables With Known
Margins When Target and Sampled Populations Differ Journal of the American Statistical
Association 86(413):87-95.
Lohr, S. L. (1999) Sampling: Design and Analysis Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks-Cole.
Manski, C.F., and Lerman, S.R. (1977) Estimation of choice probabilities from choice
based samples Econometrica 45 (8): 1977-1988.
National Center for Health Statistics (1999) Vital Statistics of the United States 1993.
Volume 1 -- Natality. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
Prentice, R.L., and Pyke R. (1979) Logistic disease incidence models and case-control
studies. Biometrika 66:403-411.
Qin, J., and J. Lawless (1994) Empirical likelihood and general estimating equations
Annals of Statistics 22(1):300-325.
Rice J. A. (1995) Mathematical Statistics and Data Analysis Pacific Grove:Wadsworth.
Rubin, D. B. (1976) Inference and Missing Data. Biometrika 63:581-592.
Rubin, D. B. (1977) Formalizing Subjective Notions About The Effect on Nonrespondents in Sample Surveys. Journal of the American Statistical Association 72(405):538543.
SAS Institute (1997) SAS/OR Technical Report: The NLP Procedure Cary, NC: SAS
Institute Inc.
Schafer J.L. (1997) Analysis of Incomplete Multivariate Data. London: Chapman and
Hall.
Smith, D. P. (1992) Formal Demography New York: Plenum.
Smith, T. F. M. (1991) Post-Stratification. Statistician 40:315-323.

24

Table 1: Survey Covariate Distributions and Covariate-specific Birth Probabilities (Bivariate),
Black and White Women Aged 30 to 35
Proportion
Whites
Blacks

Birth Probability

Marital Duration
1 year
2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
6 years
7 years
8 years
9 years
10+ years

0.034
0.040
0.045
0.052
0.059
0.063
0.062
0.070
0.075
0.500

0.043
0.056
0.057
0.066
0.069
0.064
0.068
0.071
0.076
0.430

0.013
0.112
0.191
0.191
0.177
0.163
0.167
0.144
0.127
0.068

Pre-marital child
none
one or more

0.926
0.074

0.806
0.194

0.116
0.035

Family Income-to-Poverty Ratio
lowest third
middle third
top third

0.311
0.336
0.353

0.503
0.330
0.167

0.074
0.100
0.152

Sample N (person-year pairs t-1,t)

5,813

2,453

Source: PSID 1984 to 1993
Note: Observations are of married couples in which the woman is aged 30 to 35
in the second year of the year pair.

Table 2: Unconstrained and Constrained Regression Estimates
Without income-to-poverty variable
Unconstrained
parameter
Intercept
-1.328
Pre-marital child
-1.449
year 1985
0.078
year 1986
0.297
year 1987
-0.119
year 1988
0.115
year 1989
0.028
year 1990
-0.178
year 1991
0.023
year 1992
0.243
year 1993
-0.098
marriage duration 1 year
-2.864
2 years
-0.622
3 years
0.011
5 years
-0.106
6 years
-0.220
7 years
-0.195
8 years
-0.345
9 years
-0.541
10 or more years
-1.277
black
0.086
black*pre-marital child
-0.023
black*year 1985
-0.029
black*year 1986
-0.935
black*year 1987
0.109
black*year 1988
-1.242
black*year 1989
-0.645
black*year 1990
-0.687
black*year 1991
0.108
black*year 1992
-1.106
black*year 1993
-1.035
2nd tercile income-to-poverty
3rd tercile income-to-poverty
-2 log likelihood

-2673.3

**
**

**
**

*
**
**

Constrained
standard
error
0.169
0.228
0.170
0.164
0.178
0.170
0.168
0.175
0.169
0.165
0.172
0.541
0.212
0.181
0.171
0.172
0.171
0.171
0.173
0.138
0.458
0.617
0.639
0.697
0.618
0.774
0.636
0.692
0.595
0.734
0.739
-

parameter
-1.564
-1.441
0.027
0.056
0.077
0.041
0.082
0.114
0.040
0.053
0.102
-2.854
-0.618
0.010
-0.105
-0.218
-0.193
-0.341
-0.536
-1.267
-0.017
-0.011
-0.090
-0.225
-0.338
-0.338
-0.414
-0.291
-0.089
-0.050
-0.242
-

**
**
**
**
**
**
**
**
**
**
**
**
**

*
**
**

**
**
**
**
**
**
**
**
**

standard
error (s.e.)
0.115
0.227
0.008
0.012
0.010
0.008
0.009
0.010
0.013
0.013
0.011
0.540
0.212
0.180
0.170
0.171
0.170
0.170
0.172
0.137
0.050
0.614
0.027
0.025
0.027
0.029
0.033
0.025
0.019
0.022
0.023
-

-2703.6

Notes: 1. Directly-constrained coefficients are shown in bold.
2. Statistically significant coefficients are indicated by * p < .05 and ** p < .01

s.e.
percent
reduced
31.8
0.1
95.2
92.4
94.5
95.2
94.6
94.1
92.2
92.2
93.4
0.0
0.4
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.5
89.0
0.4
95.8
96.4
95.6
96.2
94.8
96.3
96.7
97.1
96.9

Table 2: Unconstrained and Constrained Regression Estimates (continued)
With income-to-poverty variable

Intercept
Pre-marital child
year 1985
year 1986
year 1987
year 1988
year 1989
year 1990
year 1991
year 1992
year 1993
marriage duration 1 year
2 years
3 years
5 years
6 years
7 years
8 years
9 years
10 or more years
black
black*pre-marital child
black*year 1985
black*year 1986
black*year 1987
black*year 1988
black*year 1989
black*year 1990
black*year 1991
black*year 1992
black*year 1993
2nd tercile income-to-poverty
3rd tercile income-to-poverty
-2 log likelihood

Unconstrained
Constrained
standard
standard
parameter
error parameter
error
-1.628 **
0.185
-1.930 **
0.138
-1.319 **
0.229
-1.310 **
0.229
0.081
0.170
0.099 **
0.010
0.291
0.164
0.120 **
0.009
-0.133
0.178
0.132 **
0.007
0.095
0.171
0.091 **
0.009
0.022
0.169
0.145 **
0.008
-0.195
0.176
0.168 **
0.008
0.019
0.169
0.106 **
0.012
0.229
0.166
0.106 **
0.012
-0.105
0.172
0.165 **
0.008
-2.833 **
0.541
-2.820 **
0.540
-0.611 **
0.213
-0.606 **
0.212
0.019
0.181
0.018
0.180
-0.104
0.172
-0.101
0.171
-0.222
0.172
-0.221
0.171
-0.190
0.172
-0.199
0.170
-0.316 *
0.172
-0.312
0.171
-0.503 **
0.173
-0.496 **
0.172
-1.173 **
0.140
-1.164 **
0.139
0.175
0.458
0.141 **
0.054
-0.051
0.617
-0.047 **
0.615
-0.056
0.639
-0.186 **
0.030
-0.968
0.698
-0.327 **
0.027
0.107
0.619
-0.411 **
0.027
-1.221
0.774
-0.385 **
0.029
-0.635
0.636
-0.474 **
0.033
-0.721
0.692
-0.393 **
0.028
0.089
0.596
-0.129 **
0.022
-1.091
0.734
-0.102 **
0.023
-1.003
0.738
-0.281 **
0.025
0.222 *
0.099
0.219 *
0.099
0.439 **
0.096
0.434 **
0.095
-2662.4

-2693.7

s.e.
percent
reduced
25.4
0.2
94.3
94.4
96.3
94.6
95.3
95.5
93.0
92.9
95.1
0.1
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.5
0.5
0.5
88.2
0.4
95.3
96.1
95.6
96.3
94.9
96.0
96.3
96.9
96.5
0.4
0.4

θcombined

θCMLE

θο

θο
θMLE
Figure 1: The relationship between estimates
when representative sample data alone is
used (MLE) and when it is augmented by
exact population information (CMLE).

θsample
Figure 2: The relationship between the
parameters of the unconstrained ("sample")
and constrained ("combined") models and the
population parameter when the sample
survey is not representative.

Figure 3:
Survey (PSID) versus Population (NCHS) Marital Fertility Rates, Whites Aged 30 to 34

0.20
0.19

Annual Fertility Rate

0.17
0.16
0.14
0.13
0.11
0.10
0.08
0.07
1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

Year
NCHS

PSID

95% C.I.

1991

1992

1993

Figure 4:
Survey (PSID) versus Population (NCHS) Marital Fertility Rates, Blacks Aged 30 to 34
0.20
0.18
0.16

Annual Fertility Rate

0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

Year
NCHS

PSID

95% C.I.

1991

1992

1993

2

Figure 5: Estimates of the Black Minority−Status effect

1

●

●

●

0

●

●

●

●

−1

●

●

●

−2

Black Minority Status Effect

Unconstrained
Constrained

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

Year
Note: Effect is estimated by the sum of the 'black' parameter estimate and the 'black−by−year' parameter estimate for that year

0.6

Figure 6: Estimates of the Bias of the PSID for white
no pre−marriage child, married 4 years, and lowest income−to−poverty tercile

0.4

●

●

●

0.2

●

●
●

0.0

●

●

●

−0.2

Bias in log−odds of Birth

●

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

Year
Note: Bias is estimated by the unconstrained log−odds minus the constrained log−odds

92

93

●

●

0.0

0.5

●
●

●
●

−0.5

●
●

●

−1.0

●

−1.5

Bias in log−odds of Birth

1.0

1.5

Figure 7: Estimates of the Bias of the PSID for black
no pre−marriage child, married 4 years, and lowest income−to−poverty tercile

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

Year
Note: Bias is estimated by the unconstrained log−odds minus the constrained log−odds

92

93

