Location, Location, Location:
An MCMC Approach to Modeling Spatial Context
with Categorical Variables in the Study and
Prediction of War1
Michael D. Ward2

Kristian Skrede Gleditsch3

Working Paper no. 5
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
University of Washington
15th March 2000

1 Manuscript

prepared for the conference on New Methodologies for the Social Sciences:
The Development and Application of Spatial Analysis for Political Methodology held at
the University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, USA, March 10-12, 2000. It was shamelessly recycled for the 2000 Meetings of the International Studies Association held in Los
Angeles, March 14-18. We are grateful for comments or assistance from Andrew Enterline,
Henry Teune, Elizabeth Hill, Fred Hu®er, Stuart Menzer, Ulrich Woitek, Patrick Heagerty,
Tilmann Gneiting, Adrian Raftery, and Julian Besag. Data and programs for the analyses
in this manuscript can be found at http://faculty.washington.edu/mdw/replicate
2 Department of Political Science and Center for Statistics in the Social Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA, 98195, email: mdw@u.washington.edu
3 Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8RT, UK, email:
K.Gleditsch@socsci.gla.ac.uk

Abstract
Prior work has shown the strong presence of regional and spatial context in linkages
between regime characteristics and involvement in civil and international con°ict,
but no adequate statistical model has explicitly captured these forces. Models that
adequately re°ect the interdependence of actors and actions in world politics are faced
with di±cult problems of estimation since the classical likelihood becomes intractable
in the presence of the dependencies among observations. Most current solutions to
this problem are based on approaches that were developed decades ago during a period
of expensive computing. However, these approaches are no longer neither necessary
nor appropriate. Using data from 1988, we use an autologistic formulation, estimated
by Monte Carlo Markov Chain approximation, to extend our work exploring the link
between authority structures and peace, one of the most salient present research topics
in international relations. Our estimated model allows us to predict about half of the
violent domestic and international con°icts that emerged in the subsequent decade.

1 TRACKING THE ANALYSIS OF CONFLICT

1

2

Tracking the analysis of con°ict

The study of geography as a component of world politics has a checkered history.
The term geopolitics was introduced by a Swedish scholar and politician, Rudolf
Kjellen (1916) who applied Darwinian notions to the putative organic nature of states
imbued with an innate propensity for growth. Kjellen's theories gained considerable
in°uence and were instrumental in popularizing the term lebensraum which Friedrich
Ratzel (1879) introduced into the political dialogue in Europe in 1899 (Glassner 1993).
Kjellen's ideas were especially salient with a retired German general and university
professor, the director of the Munich Institute of Geopolitics and editor of Zeitschrift
fÄ
ur Geopolitik, Karl Haushofer. One of Haushofer's most impressionable students was
Rudolf Hess. Hess, Hitler, and Haushofer had many long discussions, and the rest,
as they say, is history; Hitler's expansionist foreign policy was rationalized, if not
based, on the geopolitics as introduced by Ratzel, Kjellen, and especially Haushofer.
About this same time Sir Halford John Mackinder proposed a similar notion: the
heartland concept.1 Mackinder's Heartland Theory, suggests that there was a pivotal
area \in the closed heart-land of Euro-Asia" which was most likely to become the seat
of world power, because of its inaccessibility. Nicholas Spykman, a political scientist
who founded the Institute of International Studies at Yale, was an in°uential realist
who emphasized the control of Eurasian coastal regions (Rimland).
Despite its prominent place in the development of the ¯eld of world politics, the
legacy of World War II and the end of the colonial area left geopolitics rather out
of favor in policy circles. Though the geographical basis of military strategy has
received some interest in the ¯eld of strategic studies, geopolitics in the classical sense
has been con¯ned to political geographers.2 However, the idea that geography plays
and important role in international politics need not be limited by the its political
misuses.3 In fact, the analysis of the role of geography has gradually re-emerged, and
is working its way back into the scienti¯c study of world politics and foreign policy.
In this article we explore the properties of deadly con°icts from a spatial perspective to gain insight on how they have evolved grosso modo after the birth of modern
Europe in 1876, using techniques developed to study similar phenomenon in other
1
mackinder's classic paper (1904) and his later summary (1919) have remained a more popular
and politically correct summary of the notion that a territorial imperative is \stabilizing":

Who rules East Europe commands the Heartland;
Who rules the heartland commands the World Island;
Who rules the World Island commands the World.
The National Anthem of England, Land of Hope and Glory (better known by its tune, Elgar's Pomp
and Circumstance March No. 1.), for example, extols the virtue of expansion in the following way:
\Wider and still wider, shall thy bounds be set".
2
¶ Tuathail (1996); Glassner (1993); and Taylor and Flint (1999).
For a broad discussion see O
3
If you think these notions are ignored in contemporary Eurasian politics visit the web site of
Alexander Dugin at http://www.arctogaia.com.

2 THE STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF CONFLICT

3

arenas. Despite widespread recognition of the importance of geography, only recently
have scholars begun to explore systematically international con°ict using a perspective that encourages understanding the context of con°ict from a spatial perspective.
Most of this work has not bene¯tted from the breakthroughs that have occurred in
the past three decades in the statistical analysis of spatial patterns. As yet, no published studies incorporate the most recent modeling and statistical frameworks for
modeling spatial processes.

2

The statistical analysis of con°ict

Although the causes of war and peace have long generated interest among social
scientists, historians, and philosophers, the statistical analysis of war and peace is a
relatively novel endeavor. In this section we review the development of the statistical
analysis of con°ict and its relations to the spatial analysis of con°ict

2.1

Pioneers

Somewhat surprisingly, the ¯rst scholars to undertake systematic attempts at collecting empirical data on con°ict were all from ¯elds other than international relations.
Initial data development e®orts were carried out by an historian, Quincy Wright
(1942), a sociologist, Pitrim Sorokin (1957), as well Lewis Fry Richardson (1960b), a
physicist turned meteorologist who later developed an interest in psychology.
Richardson went considerably further than the the other pioneers in terms of
statistical analysis. Based on the data he compiled on deadly quarrels, de¯ned as
events involving more than 35 casualties, Richardson analyzed whether the risk of
con°ict seemed related to factors such as shared language, religion, relative wealth,
poverty, and distance, and considered whether the distribution of outbreaks of con°ict
displayed evidence of contagion over time.
Richardson also took an interest in the spatial aspects of con°ict: He noted a
strong relationship between a state's propensity for con°ict and its number of borders.
He later expanded on this in an insightful theoretical essay on spatial topology and
how the shape of territorial entities would in°uence the opportunities for con°ict
(Richardson 1992).
Richardson's work, though written in the 1930s and 1940s, was not widely available
until the 1960s, and remained virtually unnoted by scholars of con°ict at the time.
In the 1960s, mathematical psychologists such as Rashevsky (1949) and Rapoport
(1963) revived Richardson's (1960a) model of action-reaction dynamics in armament
processes, and this lead to somewhat of a resurgence in interest and appreciation
of Richardson's work among statistically oriented scholars in international relations.
However, as pointed out by Hess (1995) and Nicholson (1999), Richardson remains
largely unknown among the mainstream of international relations. Political geographers and scholars of geopolitics appear to have ignored Richardson altogether.

2 THE STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF CONFLICT

2.2

4

Settlers

The second wave of interest in statistical analysis of con°ict in the 1960s followed in
part ideas and suggestions found in the work of the pioneers. The behavioral revolution in political science led to a more prominent position for systematic empirical
research and statistical analysis in international relations
Most of the contemporary work on con°ict has been in°uenced by the Correlates
of War project (commonly know as COW), founded at the University of Michigan by
J. David Singer in the 1960s. (Singer 1979; Singer 1980). The COW project started
collecting a comprehensive data set on armed con°ict (Singer and Small 1972; Small
and Singer 1982), classi¯ed as either interstate con°ict between nation states, civil
wars within states and extra-systemic imperial or colonial wars, where members of
the international system engage in con°ict with actors that COW did not consider
members of the international system.
Despite the broad view of \deadly quarrels" that was taken initially, most of the
subsequent empirical research has limited itself almost exclusively on interstate con°ict among nation states.4 Moreover, most of the extant research looks at con°ict,
especially international con°ict, through a lens that is constructed somewhat arti¯cially. Most studies of con°ict view it from one of three perspectives. At a monadic
level, either a country participates in a con°ict{or not{and has a duration, extent,
and scope of involvement in that con°ict. At a dyadic level, pairs of countries are
involved in a con°ict, with each node in the so-called dyad having certain con°ict
speci¯c characteristics. At the systemic level, con°ict can be judged by whether war
is taking place somewhere in system. Sometimes, the extent of con°ict is assessed by
the share of countries or dyads that are deemed to be involved in con°ict. In this
way, deadly quarrels have been ¯ltered, deconstructed, and reconstructed to match
extant and (slowly) evolving databases and data-analysis strategies.
The original research in the COW project was particularly interested in examining the relationships postulated in \classical international relations theory" linking
con°ict to attributes of the international system itself - such as the number of poles
or distribution of military capabilities. However, few, if any, robust generalities have
between system attributes and con°ict have emerged.
In recognition that war is a process or outcome of interaction among decisionmakers in states, one main thrust of current research is to focus on dyads or pairs of
countries, and examine whether sets of covariates associated with theories of con°ict
behavior seem to a®ect the observed likelihood of con°ict at the margin (Bremer and
Cusack 1995; Most and Starr 1989).
Even though the behavioral trust of the dyadic approach has been somewhat more
successful strategy for empirical research, its track record is nonetheless rather mixed,
with a large number of \non-¯ndings" or no strong systematic relationships. There
seems, for example, to be no general, stable relationship between the distribution of
4

In Gleditsch and Ward (2000a) we address this issue more completely.

3 TOWARD A NEW GEOPOLITICS OF DEADLY QUARRELS

5

power and the propensity of dyadic con°ict. Nor do arms race processes between
states seem strongly associated with outbreaks of war. Many of the strongest empirical regularities obtain for historical or geographical covariates; Countries are more
likely to ¯ght other proximate states, and con°icts are likely to spread geographically
across borders or recur between parties over time.

3

Toward a new geopolitics of deadly quarrels

We believe that a return to Richardson's notion of deadly quarrels and his focus on
the spatial aspects of con°ict has much to o®er both in terms of improving theories
of con°ict and furthering empirical research. In the following, we ¯rst discuss why
we believe an exclusive focus on interstate con°ict as de¯ned by the COW project
may be overly limiting. Based on our previous work on democratization and war, we
then show how explicitly incorporating space can contribute to furthering empirical
research on con°ict.

3.1

(Re-)de¯ning con°ict

There is a strong tendency in international relations to assume that it is self-evident
what would constitute violent con°ict and not. Most applied researchers tend to
assume that the commonly used data probably by and large will accurately re°ect
their theoretical concepts. To be sure, scholars generally acknowledge that there may
be large amounts of measurement error. But such error would be merely random
noise and essentially wash out in the aggregate, provided there are no systematic
sources of bias and misleading attributions. The availability of the COW interstate
war data has enabled researchers to proceed to analyze data on con°ict without too
much concern about de¯ning the events of interest. In the following, we discuss some
non-trivial problems indicating that measurement in the study of con°ict often seems
out of touch with our general understanding of what the concept entails.
The term con°ict denotes some form of incompatibility between parties. Most
de¯nitions stress incompatibility which is explicitly perceived by the parties involved,
rather than contrary goals based upon some form of objective function of the actors'
interest or the structure of their relationship.5 Boulding (1963, 5), for example, de¯nes
con°ict as \a situation of competition in which the parties{of which there are at least
two {are aware of the incompatibility of potential future positions, and in which each
party wishes to occupy a position that is incompatible with the wishes of the other."
Although some degree of con°ict may be inherent in any social relation, researchers
usually draw a fundamental distinction between violent and non-violent forms of
con°ict, and focus on overt resort to violence and its absence. Violence is, of course,
5

Concepts such as structural violence (see H¿ivik and Galtung (1971) for an example) generated
considerable interest in the 1960s and 1970s, but is not central in current research.

3 TOWARD A NEW GEOPOLITICS OF DEADLY QUARRELS

6

by no means the only way of in°icting punitive measures, and ¯nal resort to violence
is arguably the result of larger processes that may or may not lead to violence. It
is thus desirable to distinguish between qualitatively di®erent forms of \no-war" in
statistical analysis (Gleditsch 1999).
Violent social con°ict must furthermore be distinguished from other interpersonal
violence. The former encompasses hostile interactions between some reasonably wellde¯ned set of parties or actors that involve violence above some magnitude and which
persist for some period of time. Domestic or urban violence may a®ect a larger number
of persons directly than interstate con°ict, but would not be considered social con°ict
as neither perpetrators nor victims constitute actors or parties in the sense of a uni¯ed
group.6 To ensure tractability, most introduce some threshold of violence for something
to constitute evidence of con°ict. For our purposes, the Correlates of War criterion
of more than 1,000 battle deaths for something to constitute a \major war" provides
a reasonable approach to delineating violent armed con°ict (Singer and Small 1982,
1972).7
Unlike much of other contemporary research, we ¯nd it limiting to restrict attention to con°ict between nation states only. Interstate con°ict is a relatively limited
share of the armed con°ict involving nation states. According to Wallensteen and
Sollenberg (1998), only six out of 103 armed con°icts in the period 1989-97 were
strictly interstate con°icts (see also Holsti 1996: 22). Some argue that the relative
share of \civil" versus \international" con°ict has increased over the 20th century.
We have strong doubts about the accuracy of data on civil war (say, in Africa) at the
beginning of the century. However, any increase in civil wars nonetheless seems to
run counter to what one would expect from the proliferation of states over the period,
which would suggest that civil wars might be converted to interstate wars.
If our broader substantive interest as political scientists is understanding what
conditions underlie the violence that aggravates and threatens the health and well
being of millions of individuals, it is not obvious why we should restrict our focus
exclusively to a small subset. Even at a time when many see the world approaching
something akin to an end of international war, the extent of warfare in the international system and its consequences still seem substantial. The consequences of nuclear
war might be catastrophic, yet, very simple weapons have claimed vastly more lives
than than nuclear missiles. In our view, the most common justi¯cations for the exclusive focus on interstate con°ict in research on con°ict do not seem su±ciently
substantiated.
6

Similarly, acts of \democide" or a government violence against its own population would generally not be considered social con°ict, because the victims do not constitute a group. Rummel (1995)
estimates that democide have claimed ¯ve times more casualties than international wars in the 20th
century.
7
We thus limit ourselves to the COW international and civil war data set rather than so-called
militarized disputes which include events below this level of casualties. We ¯nd the so-called MID
data problematic (Gleditsch 1999, ch. 4), moreover this data only includes disputes between states.

3 TOWARD A NEW GEOPOLITICS OF DEADLY QUARRELS

3.2

7

The internationalized nature of deadly quarrels

That states constitute the principal actors is somewhat of an article of faith in the
¯eld of international relations. Much of international relations theory holds relations
between states to be fundamentally di®erent from relations within formally sovereign
states given the condition of anarchy and absence of formal authority. Although the
question is rarely addressed explicitly, researchers tend to be skeptical as to whether
theories of international con°ict are applicable to con°ict within countries or transnational con°ict involving both state and non-state entities.
A probably not fully intended side e®ect of the assumption of sovereignty is that
most researchers simply assume that sovereignty is e®ective within nations, thereby
making civil war qualitatively di®erent from interstate con°ict. Yet, sovereignty is
obviously less than fully e®ective within many existing states, and similar problems of
enforcement and contracting under anarchy could obtain within states as well. When
relating \Warre" to anarchy, Hobbes had relations within states in mind, not the
international system.
Restricting analyzes to interstate wars is in practice more problematic than often
assumed by practitioners in the sense that researchers seem unaware of what events
become excluded. In the COW terminology, international wars encompass in addition
to interstate wars also extra-systemic wars, in which system members engage in war
with a political entity not considered to be a system member. Many armed con°icts in
the postwar era, however, are classi¯ed as \civil wars" with outside intervention rather
than interstate wars. Events regarded as internal or \civil" wars such as Afghanistan,
Angola, Lebanon, and Bosnia-Herzegovina, nonetheless display obvious international
dimensions.
Whether something is judged to be an external or internal con°ict in retrospect is
quite sensitive to legal and de¯nitional aspects in themselves unrelated to properties
of the con°ict. The Vietnam war, for example, is regarded as an international war
once the United States intervenes, having been previously classi¯ed as a civil war that
grows out of an initial extra-systemic war involving France prior to independence.
More generally, a con°ict becomes an international or civil war depending on how
the con°ict and foreign intervention unfolds. As intervention often occurs in connection with attempts to replace the existing government, the outcome of interventions
or which party is considered to be the legitimate government at the time of intervention can \determine" whether an intervention involves interstate war or constitutes
international intervention in an ongoing civil con°ict. If the anticommunist Herat
uprising in Afghanistan had succeeded in actually toppling the government, a Soviet intervention could conceivably have become an event marking the onset of an
interstate war.8 Additional ambiguities arise as to whether con°icts revolving around
the breakup of entities and the emergence of new states as seen as in the former
Yugoslavia constitute wars between sovereign nations or \internal" wars.
8

The 1956 invasion of Hungary, for example, is considered an interstate war.

3 TOWARD A NEW GEOPOLITICS OF DEADLY QUARRELS

8

Upon closer scrutiny, lists of interstate wars cover only a subset of what observers
perceive as armed con°ict and war. Merely a cursory view indicate that many scholars
seem unaware of these implications. Mans¯eld and Snyder's (1995) work on democratization and war, for example, repeatedly refers to con°icts in the former Soviet Union
and the Balkans to illustrate their argument. However, neither Chechnya nor Bosnia
are considered international wars, and are as such not included in the empirical data
that they rely on. Mans¯eld and Snyder (1997) similarly cite Rwanda as evidence of
how democratization leads to war, though this is a \civil war" not included in their
empirical analysis limited to international wars. Our aim is not to single out particular research. However, these examples indicate that large discrepancies between
theory and data are quite widespread in research on international con°ict.
Our argument is not so much that the COW classi¯cations are \wrong" or that
civil and extra-systemic wars are fully equivalent to interstate wars. However, this
terminology might impose a distinction that is theoretically untenable. If this partition gained a great deal, such a tradeo® may be worth the cost. Our view is that
the limitations far outweigh the gains. Civil wars carry a potential for di®usion and
escalation to interstate wars, and are classi¯ed as one or the other based in part on
whether they do or not. Such classi¯cation problems underscore why limiting con°ict
to clear-cut cases of interstate war fails to fully correspond to the general phenomenon
of interest. To understand regional formations of con°ict and peace, \civil" con°icts
which contribute to regional insecurity cannot merely be excluded out of hand.
The standard formal model of con°ict as interaction between two parties X and Y
has come to be identi¯ed with states, and does not always translate easily to situations
with constellations of other types of actors. However, a simpli¯cation or abstraction
which we invoke in a modeling device is not necessarily an appropriate theoretical
criteria for de¯ning con°ict or a suitable empirical case selection device.
Taking a broader view of con°icts as violent events that have various degrees of
international dimensions and implications, we relax the criterion that both of the
principal opposing parties must be system members We consider all events in the
Correlates of War international and civil war data as indicators of whether a country
participates in violent con°ict. Although the original COW data are available only
up to 1992, we have updated them to 1998 using information from Wallensteen and
Sollenberg (1999).
We identify outbreaks of new con°icts by the COW classi¯cations as to what constitutes separate con°icts. We recognize that it is di±cult to identify what constitutes
a new con°ict and that successive events may not be entirely independent.
3.2.1

The meaning of y=1 in studies of con°ict

The decisions above do not solve all the ambiguities in data on con°ict. Most notably,
it is clear that the condition \state A is involved in war at time t" being true could
mean a variety of di®erent things. Not all incidents of con°ict participation seem

3 TOWARD A NEW GEOPOLITICS OF DEADLY QUARRELS

9

equivalent or symmetric between the parties.
A given incident of con°ict which a country is involved in may take place either
on (i) a country's own territory (or in the immediate proximity) or (ii) outside its
own regional context. The consequences of con°ict and the element of threat to a
state's vital security and territory di®er considerably with the speci¯c location.
Consider the case of the Vietnam war, where the US becomes involved in a civil
war between the two Vietnams growing out of a colonial war with France. However,
the con°ict was fought entirely in Indochina, and a®ected North and South Vietnam
in a very di®erent ways than the US. Although the US may de¯ne its security interest
to encompass objectives beyond its regional context, it was spared most of the physical
destruction and the risk of the con°ict spreading to the US territory or home turf
was essentially minimal. Similarly, Cuba commits large number of troops in support
of the MPLA government in the civil war in Angola, but no civil war is taking place
on Cuba itself.
These problems become more severe when we are interested in the spatial aspects
of con°ict. The prospects for di®usion of con°ict are greater the closer a state is
to the actual locus on con°ict. The recent events in Kosovo clearly involves a risk
of violent con°ict in Macedonia. Spanish forces participating in UN operations in
Kosovo, however, would not be expected to lead to di®usion to Morocco.
The existing COW data tell us on what continents con°ict is waged. Ideally,
however, our data on con°ict would include disaggregated information on extension
and location of the various battles.

3.3

Di®usion of con°ict

Many have hypothesized that con°icts may spread or di®use over time and among
countries across space. Richardson examined whether outbreaks of war seemed to
be randomly distributed events by comparing his data to a Poisson distribution.
Richardson found that the distribution seemed within the range of variation that
could be expected under a Poisson distribution, and concluded that con°icts seemed
to be random over time. He also discarded other arguments about secular trends on
the basis of similar probabilistic reasoning.
However, it would be incorrect to conclude that Richardson considered con°icts
entirely random phenomena. Richardson (1960b, 176-183, 288) observed a strong 0.7
correlation between a country's number of borders and its extent of war involvement,
which he attributed to the opportunities for contact. He further explored the relationship between contiguity and con°ict through mathematical models, and noted that
existing political division of the world displayed several regularities or \remarkable
political facts" not mandated by the geometry of closed polyhedra. Almost no countries are completely surrounded by another, and almost every vertex (or points where
more than two entities meet) has the simplest possible structure, consisting either of
three countries or two countries meeting water (1960b, 290-1). Though Richardson

3 TOWARD A NEW GEOPOLITICS OF DEADLY QUARRELS

10

is not explicit on this point, he seems to recognize that this simplicity of structure
is not incidental, but has resulted as the outcome of political processes. \Simple"
territorial structures are generally more compact, and thus easier to defend or fortify
than complex shaped territory.
The later settlers ¯rst approached di®usion by examining whether the distribution of outbreaks of con°ict conformed to statistical distribution for independent
events such as the Poisson distribution. Davis, Duncan, and Siverson (1978) examined di®usion of con°ict over time on the system level, or whether outbreaks of war
tended to be followed by an increased likelihood of subsequent outbreaks of war. In
general, however, most concorded with Richardson on that outbreaks seemed to be
indistinguishable from a random process.
The weak evidence for di®usion from this line of research seems at odds with
casual evidence of di®usion. Most and Starr (1980) noted several di±culties with
the \does-the-outbreaks-of-war-conform-to-a-Poisson-distribution?" approach. Such
tests against a nil model of independence say little about the speci¯c form of dependence hypothesized to exist between observations if the model should be rejected.
Most and Starr (1980, 933) delineated a series of possible positive and negative dependent relationship between war outbreak and participation over space and time.
Di®usion may induce positive or negative reinforcement of con°ict involvement,
making future war participation more likely, as suggested by the concept of\enduring
rivalries", or less likely, as suggested by \weariness of war" hypotheses. However, wars
may also di®use between nations so that an outbreak of war in one country increases
(or decreases) the subsequent likelihood of outbreaks of wars in other countries. Most
and Starr examined such positive and negative spatial di®usion by testing empirically
whether new cases of war participation were more likely to occur in countries with
warring border nations. Using a series of di®erent data sets on con°ict, they found
that the presence of warring border nations indeed appeared to increase the likelihood
of war.
The di®usion through \war in bordering nations" research program has contributed to international relations research by clarifying some of the opportunities
and constraints for interaction and the spatial dependence between units. It taught
us that the spatial correlation of con°ict seems to be strong. Most and Starr (1980,
936) pointed out that spatial non-dependence would have statistical consequences
similar to serial correlation in time, and suggested that the lack of attention to spatial dependence or di®usion of con°ict could have lead to biased results and impeded
progress in research on the causes of war. However, Most and Starr and later contributors did not provide adequate statistical models for dealing with the spatial
correlation.

4 DEMOCRACY, CONFLICT, AND PEACE

3.4

11

Towards a geography of violent con°ict

Later statistical research on di®usion and the spatial aspects of con°ict and cooperation was strongly in°uenced by approaches developed in regional science. The socalled spatial econometric approach surveyed by Anselin (1988) popularized introducing spatial context in statistical models through a matrix speci¯cation of dependence
between entities and a \spatial lag" term that accounts for the spatial correlation
of the dependent variable. This is based upon work now 25 years old (Besag and
Moran 1975; Ord 1975) that demonstrates how the computational di±culties with
the maximum likelihood estimator for autoregressive models for spatial interaction
could be solved by a simpli¯ed computational scheme based on a trick involving the
eigenvalues of the spatial weights matrix too arcane to discuss.
These approaches have been used in several studies (O'Loughlin 1986; Kirby and
Ward 1987; Ward and Kirby 1987; Shin and Ward 1999). However, the framework
has a series of drawbacks for studies of con°ict. This class of models have been developed for continuous dependent variables, whereas most data on con°ict is categorical,
typically binary.9 Even though models for spatially correlated categorical variables
have been developed over the past three decades in the statistical analysis of spatial
patterns (Besag 1972; Besag 1974), the work of con°ict has not bene¯tted from these
breakthroughs that have occurred. Estimation has usually been based on computational methods that initially were introduced as convenient solutions for seemingly
intractable problems, but no longer seem necessary.

4

Democracy, con°ict, and peace

In this section we present a brief overview of the evolution in previous research of
the model we propose to analyze. The seeming absence of war between democracies
was ¯rst noted by Babst, but what has later become known as the democratic peace
entered into the mainstream of empirical research on international con°ict through
a series of articles by Rummell and the controversies it generated. The democratic
peace has provided a boost to empirical research and generated interest in numerous
related propositions.
In a series of papers (Ward and Gleditsch 1998; Gleditsch and Ward 2000c), we
have re-examined the controversy surrounding whether democratization is associated
with improved prospects or greater risk of war as suggested by Mans¯eld and Snyder
(1995).10 Mans¯eld and Snyder (1995) aggregated changes in authority structures
over a ten-year period, and examined whether democratization seemed to be associated with incidents of con°ict in the subsequent ten years through Â2 tests of
9

We leave aside the question of whether con°ict is inherently discrete events or more continuous phenomena. Even if con°icts can di®er greatly in degree, most classi¯cation opt for coding
presence/absence.
10
For other contributions, see Thompson and Tucker (1997) and Enterline (1998).

5 A PARSIMONIOUS MODEL OF DEMOCRACY AND WAR

12

independence.
In light of some of the problems in this tabular analysis approach, Ward and Gleditsch (1998) proposed examining the likelihood of con°ict as a function of changes in
authority structures over a prior ten-year period. Instead of dichotomizing \change"
versus \no-change," they proposed disaggregating changes into their direction or sign,
magnitude of change, and variability of change or the variance in authority structure
over the period. The results indicated that substantial democratization would reduce
the likelihood of war, whereas smaller changes or transitions to democracy that are
followed by reversals to autocracy could increase the risk of war.

4.1

War and peace in time and space

Ward and Gleditsch (1998), essentially ignored any dependence between the pooled
observations, both over time and across space. Gleditsch and Ward (2000c) and
Gleditsch (1999) estimated revised versions of the original model to address these
issues.
Gleditsch and Ward (2000c) examined the duration dependence of war and peace
over time as well as investigated the e®ects of democratization on outbreaks and continuation/termination of wars separately. In addition, the model was revised in an
attempt to take into account dependence across units in space. First, we evaluated
the extent of clustering of con°ict. If con°ict is distrubuted non-randomly in space,
statistical models ignoring di®usion or the dependence of war and peace among countries could be ridden by serially correlated error terms. Second, we considered whether
con°ict was related to the extent of democracy in neighboring countries. Gleditsch
(1999) found that the likelihood of con°ict for a given country seemed more consistently related to the authority structures in the larger surrounding region than the
attributes of each individual country.
Space was treated as ¯xed in these studies, however, though the number of states
in the system and their proximity and borders change quite considerable between 1875
and the contemporary era. Gleditsch and Ward (2000c) tested explicitly whether the
relationship of the continuous variables to the likelihood of the event occuring seemed
linear in log odds through a Generalized Additive Model speci¯cation. Their results
indicate that though many of the e®ects did not seem fully linear in the log odds,
only the e®ects of democracy displayed monotonicity.
In the next section we focus on two basic aspects of this model: the negative
impact of high levels of democracy on con°ict propensity and the contagion e®ects of
con°icts in surrounding regions.

5

A Parsimonious Model of Democracy and War

The basic insight we propose herein is that state i's probability of con°ict is highly
dependent upon the existence of con°ict in all other states ¡i. Curiously, such in-

5 A PARSIMONIOUS MODEL OF DEMOCRACY AND WAR

13

terdependence is typically lacking in empirical models of international relations and
world politics.
Our basic model is an autologistic model of the likelihood that a state i will be
involved in a con°ict at time t. We specify the dependencies between the N countries
in our sample by a binary N £ N distance based connectivity matrix, where entries
Wi;j acquire a value of 1 if states i and j are considered adjacent or \close". We
generate the W matrix from a new data set on the minimum distances between
polities in the international system (Gleditsch and Ward 2000b). Two independent
covariates capture the level of democracy and the regional context of democracy: di;t
the level of democracy at time t in country i for all countries (1; : : : ; n), ranging from
¡10 for highly autocratic to +10 for highly democratic and d0i;t W s , the average level
of democracy in contiguous countries, with W s denoting a connectivity matrix W
that has been row standardized.
A simple, linear statement of these independent aspects to which an intercept ®
and a spatial covariate yi0 W are added is given as
® + ¯1 di + ¯2 d0i W s + °yi0 W
where yi0 W is the sum of neighbors in con°ict for a given de¯nition of neighbors
contained in the contiguity matrix, W .
Collecting into ´i the k exogenous terms in a k £ i matrix of exogenous variables
Xi , and the associated parameters into a vector ¯~k , and de¯ning the neighborhood
sum or spatial lag, yi0 W , as yei , yields
´i = ® + X0i ¯~k + ° yei

which permits a simple statement of the autologistic:
P r[yi = 1jyei ] =

e´i
1 + e´i

(1)

If ° = 0 this is a standard logistic; if all ¯k are 0, this becomes the standard autologistic without covariates. The autologistic model is widely known in statistics and
has been widely used for applications in ecology and natural science, but appears to
have been completely ignored in the social sciences.
It is widely know that this model has a likelihood function which is mathematically
intractable since the yi are conditionally dependent upon each other (Besag 1974).
Three computational methods have been proposed to solve this problem. Besag
(1974) devised a coding method that reduced the dependencies to a few adjacencies,
assuming all other observations are independent and exchangeable. The resulting
scheme permits maximum likelihood estimation. This method is ine±cient and is
little used in practice (e.g., Hu®er and Wu 1998). A maximum pseudolikelihood
method was developed (Besag 1975) that uses a weighted average of di®erent coding
methods, and its e±ciency examined (Hu®er and Wu 1998; Besag 1977; Besag and

5 A PARSIMONIOUS MODEL OF DEMOCRACY AND WAR

14

Moran 1975). This has been found to be ine±cient, especially when spatial interaction
is strong.
The third class of estimation approaches is Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods. These approaches originate in statistical physics.11 These methods are computationally intensive and allow one to approximate maximum likelihood estimates
for any family of distributions with probability densities known up to a constant of
proportionality. This approach has been widely and recently used in image recognition/reconstruction (Hoeting, Leecaster and Bowden 1999) as well as parameter estimation (Gumpertz, Wu and Pye 1999; Gumpertz, Graham and Ristaino 1997; Gotway
and Stroup 1997).
In our earlier work, in particular Gleditsch and Ward (2000c), we employed a version of the pseudolikelihood approach to estimation. One major disadvantage of this
approach is that it tends not to work in the situations which we are most interested
in studying: strong spatial patterns. More recently, however, it has become possible to use simulation approaches {namely the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
method{ to get approximations that are closer to the full likelihood function.
The basic approach introduced in Geyer and Thompson (1992) is quite simple in
conception and has been used by Wu and Hu®er (1998) as well as Hoeting, Leecaster,
and Bowden (1999). If ~µ = (®; ¯~k ; °), then a probability measure of a random map
generated from this model forms an exponential family de¯ned by the parameters ~µ
and the su±cient statistics, ~s(y), given by
~s(y) =

µX
n
i=1

yi ;

n
X

Xi yi ;

i=1

¶

n
1X
y~i :
2 i=1

For any chosen vector of parameters corresponding to µ, say Ã, a sample of maps
containing simulated values for yi can be obtained. Typically, the pseudolikelihood
estimates of the parameters are used for Ã. A Gibbs sampler (Geman and Geman
1984) is then used for data augmentation generating a large set of samples based on Ã.
These simulated samples are then used to derive a set of su±cient statistics. Using the
su±cient statistics from these samples it is possible to determine an approximation
to the likelihood function for µ based on the approximation found in the sample. The
Markov Chain maximum likelihood, found through these approximations, is obtained
by solving the score equation, typically by use of Newton-Raphson methods:
Pm

0
^
s(ym )e(µ¡Ã) ~s(ym )
j=1 ~
Pm
0~
^
(µ¡Ã)
s(ym )
j=1 e

= ~s(yobserved )

(2)

where m is the number of sampled simulated maps and ~s() is the vector of su±cient
statistics.12
11

Alan Sokal (1996), of Social Text fame, has written a good overview of the foundations and
algorithms with applications to physics. See Gelman et alia (1995) for an accessible introduction in
the context of Bayesian methods.
12
Newton-Raphson methods are a crude, iterative way to minimize a function modulo a set of

5 A PARSIMONIOUS MODEL OF DEMOCRACY AND WAR

5.1

15

Empirical results

We examine this simple model for data from 1988, taken from Polity 98 and a W
matrix using a 475 km minimum distance threshold. Pseudolikelihood and MCMC
estimates of the parameters can be found in Table 1. This is an exceedingly parsimonious model with only two covariates: the level of democracy in a country and the
average level of democracy in the surrounding countries. We have kept the model
quite simple to provide a di±cult test for the autologistic formulation. This should
enable us to see how much information exists in the spatial distribution of con°ict
itself and further enable us to examine its di®usion.
^ are smaller than the corresponding pseudoIn general the MCMC estimates (µ)
^
likelihood estimates (Ã). MCMC standard errors are quite small for each estimate.
As would be expected, democracy shows a strong negative e®ect on the probability
of con°ict, while the spatial context of con°ict shows evidence of strong spatial correlation. The spatial context of democracy is very close to zero, with a fairly large
standard error; by traditional standards this would not be seen to be a powerful
covariate. In short, all other things being set aside as \controlled for," democracy
in°uences a robust negative in°uence on the likelihood that a country will be involved
in a domestic or international con°ict of substantial magnitude. At the same time,
there is a stronger, independent (same scale) locational e®ect. Countries that are
surrounded by con°ictual countries will also have a much higher likelihood of being
involved in a con°ict, either civil or international.
Table 1: MCMC and Pseudolikelihood Parameter Estimates
Intercept
Estimator
®
^
MCMC Maximum Likelihood µ
-1.712
^
Pseudolikelihood Ã
-1.840
MCMC ¾
^
0.0601

Spatial Parameters
Democracy Democracy Con°ict
¯1
¯2
°
-0.053
-0.003
0.261
-0.020
0.013
0.298
0.0061
0.0099
0.0133

It has been noted that many studies of international con°ict have fairly low predictive capabilities. Beck, King and Zheng (2000) have argued that virtually no studies
of international con°ict have predicted probabilities greater than the typical threshold used in many other ¯elds, ¼
^ > :5. This is true for the pseudolikelihood estimates
shown above. However, the MCMC estimates that we provide do in fact exceed this
parameters µ. The basic iteration is given by: µi+1 = µ ¡ G¡1 (µi )g(µi ), with g(µi ) a vector of
derivatives of f with respect to the µi and G(µi ) is the m £ m matrix of second derivatives of f .This
method is very fast if it begins close to the minimum, but slow and thorny if it doesn't: G may
in such cases become negative de¯nite. \May" means \does" in this context. Newton-Raphson
algorithms also can produce exploding parameter vectors as well as cyclical results.

5 A PARSIMONIOUS MODEL OF DEMOCRACY AND WAR

16

threshold (see Table 2) in 7 of the 138 cases, admittedly a small proportion, but
certainly not an empty set. Moreover, of the seven con°icts that are postdicted, two
of them are actual con°icts that did occur. Iraq and Syria both were involved in
con°ict in 1988. Figure 1 presents the probability density for the estimates from the
autologistic model.
Table 2: Actual and Predicted Con°ict States
Observed
Predicted No Yes
No
109
29
Yes
5
2

Density

Figure 1: Density Function for Predicted Probability of Con°ict

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Predicted Probability

However such a comparison leaves unincorporated any errors that might be introduced by the model itself, and is therefore not an adequate re°ection of the model's
predictive power. We conduct a simulation, using the estimate µ^ to produce estimates,
but instead of using the observed data on con°ict (i.e., the data that were used in
generating the estimates) we allow con°ict values to be produced by the model on the
°y.13 This requires a starting value for con°ict. We use the current state of con°ict
in 1988. The model is then simulated and con°ict is turned on or o® in each country
based on the autologistic equation. Then the simulated current state of con°ict is
13

Based on Figure 1 we use 0:4 as a cut-o® value for predicting con°ict.

5 A PARSIMONIOUS MODEL OF DEMOCRACY AND WAR

17

used as input values, and the process is repeated until it settles down, usually after
several iterations. Table 3 shows that such a dynamic use of the estimate coe±cients,
produces somewhat stronger results in addition to being more faithful to the autologistic formulation. In this instance, we are able to correctly predict eight con°icts,
and have an equal number of false positives.
Table 3: Actual and Predicted Con°ict States 1988
Observed
Predicted No Yes
No
99
23
Yes
8
8
^ along with the data on
Finally, we use the estimated parameters for 1988 (µ)
democracy and the spatial lag of democracy for 1988 to predict the state of con°ict in
the subsequent decade to 1998, using a cut-o® value of 0:35 obtained from inspecting
the density function. We are basically predicting whether there will be a domestic or
international con°ict in the next ten years, based on knowledge about the current state
of con°ict in all countries, coupled with knowledge of whether they are democracies
or autocracies in 1988.
Table 4: Using 1988 Estimates to Predict Con°ict from 1988 through 1998
Observed
Predicted No Yes
No
73
29
Yes
8
26

As shown in Table 4 there are twenty six successful predictions of con°ict (along
with 73 successful predictions of no con°ict), tempered by eight false predicted con°icts and twenty nine missed con°icts. Stated di®erently, the simple autologistic
model estimated on the 1988 data classi¯es about 75 percent of the annual observations in the subsequent year correctly. More interestingly, it successfully classi¯es
almost 50 percent of the con°icts. The correctly classi¯ed con°icts are listed in Table 5.14
14

Our model misses cases of war participation for Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Cambodia,
Canada, Colombia, Cuba, El Salvador, France, Guinea-Bissau, India, Italy, Liberia, Liberia, Morocco, Myanmar, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Peru, Philippines, Rumania, Russia, South Africa, Sierra
Leone, Sri Lanka, United Kingdom, United States, Vietnam, Yugoslavia, Zimbabwe. In many of
these cases (e.g., UK) con°ict was not actually waged on the state's own territory. Some countries
involved in war in the period did not exist in 1988 (e.g., Bosnia), and are as such not part of the
prediction set.

5 A PARSIMONIOUS MODEL OF DEMOCRACY AND WAR

18

Table 5: Pro¯le of Correctly Predicted Con°icts
Country
Bahrain
Burundi
Chad
Congo-Brazzaville
Democratic Republic of Congo { Zaire
Egypt
Ethiopia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Nigeria
Oman
Qatar
Rwanda
Saudi-Arabia
Somalia
Sudan
Syria
Tanzania
Turkey
United Arab Emirates
Uganda
Yemen

Type of War
International
Civil
International
Civil
Civil
International
International
International
Civil, International
Civil
International
Civil
International
Civil
International
International
Civil
International
Civil
Civil
Civil, International
Civil
Civil
International
Civil
Civil

Date of Onset
1991
1988, 1991, 1998
1997
1997
1991
1998
1991
1991

1992, 1994, 1996
1991
1991
1990, 1998
1991
1995
1991
1991
1991
1994

These results seem quite promising, but should not be cited as evidence of the
ability to predict war and turmoil. The model is very preliminary, containing only
one powerful covariate, ignoring many other forces that are known to be important.
At the same time it fails to predict con°ict in the majority of cases where con°ict
emerges. Wars are relatively rare events so that results could be quite erratic from
one time period to another. In the longer run, the evolution of hostility and con°ict
as well as appeasing factors must be incorporated explicitly in the model.
Despite these limitations, to our knowledge this e®ort is unique in successfully
bringing a strategic interaction perspective into a predictive mode for a large number
of cases. Our results clearly demonstrate that a rejection of the notion that all international actors are sovereign and independent still permits considerable statistical
investigation of the patterns of international con°ict. To our knowledge it is also

6 CONCLUSION

19

unique in its success rate in predicting con°ict, ex post ante.

6

Conclusion

International relations proclaims to study the interdependence of the forces in world
politics, especially countries and organizations. However, virtually all scholarship
that is statistically based has made the assumption that all countries are exchangeable
(Ward 1988) and their data are statistically independent. This has blinded us to the
substantial evidence of associative interactions in world politics.
Anselin (1988) and LeSage (1999) so-called spatial econometrics, using the insights
from Besag and Moran (1975) and Ord (1975) to circumvent the computing problems involved with complicated likelihood functions, was a fundamental breakthrough
which allowed likelihood estimates to be computed without solving the Jacobian matrix for each observation for each iteration. A quarter of a century ago, Besag formulated the pseudolikelihood approach to estimating parameters for the autologistic
formulation. This was necessary since the likelihood function of this speci¯cation was
mathematically intractable, owing to the fact that everything is dependent on everything else. However, this pseudolikelihood approach for binary variables remained
ignored in political science and geography until very recently.
In the era of expensive computing both of these computational solutions made
sense. Two things have happened in the nonce, however. First, computers are now
surpassing the 1 GigaHertz speed marks. Computing and memory, as well as object
oriented languages, have made computationally intensive methods very a®ordable
and readily available. At the same time, the growth of MCMC approaches to solving di±cult likelihood functions has allowed researchers to undertake the analysis of
problems that were previously too di±cult to tackle. As a result of these two trends,
the old tricks are no longer relevant and may in fact serve to give us the wrong answers as well as point us in the wrong direction. The range of opportunities for a
full-°edged spatial approach to deadly quarrels (and other discrete and continuous
social phenomena) is clearly very wide and the potential bene¯ts seem substantial,
judging from these simple steps.

REFERENCES

20

References
Anselin, Luc. 1988. Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models. Dordrecht, the
Netherlands: Kluwer.
Beck, Neal, Gary King and Langche Zheng. 2000. \The Problem with Quantitative
Studies of Con°ict: A Conjecture." American Political Science Review 94:in
press.
Besag, Julian E. 1972. \Nearest-neighbour Systems: A Lemma With Application to
Bartlett's Global Solutions." Journal of Applied Probability 9:418.
Besag, Julian E. 1974. \Spatial Interaction and the Statistical Analysis of Lattice
Systems (with Discussion)." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B,
Methodological 36:192{225.
Besag, Julian E. 1975. \Statistical Analysis of Non-lattice Data." The Statistician
24:179.
Besag, Julian E. 1977. \E±ciency of Pseudolikelihood Estimation for Simple Gaussian
Fields." Biometrika 64:616.
Besag, Julian E. and Patrick A. P. Moran. 1975. \On the Estimation and Testing of
Spatial Interaction in Gaussian Lattice Processes." Biometrika 62:555.
Boulding, Kenneth E. 1963. Con°ict and Defense: A General Theory. New York:
Harper and Row.
Bremer, Stuart A. and Thomas R. Cusack. 1995. The Process of War: Advancing
the Scienti¯c Study of War. Luxembourg and Philadelphia, PA: Gordon and
Breach.
Davis, William, George Duncan and Randolph M. Siverson. 1978. \The Dynamics of
Warfare, 1816-1965." American Journal of Political Science 22:772{792.
Enterline, Andrew J. 1998. \Regime Changes, Neighborhoods, and Interstate Con°ict, 1816-1992." Journal of Con°ict Resolution 42:804{29.
Gelman, Andrew, John B. Carlin, Hal S. Stern and David B. Rubin. 1995. Bayesian
Data Analysis. Chapman & Hall.
Geman, Stuart and Donald Geman. 1984. \Stochastic Relaxation, Gibbs Distributions and the Bayesian Restoration of Images." IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 6:721{741gem.

REFERENCES

21

Geyer, Charles J. and Elizabeth A. Thompson. 1992. \Constrained Monte Carlo
Maximum Likelihood for Dependent Data, (with Discussion)." Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, Series B, Methodological 54:657{699.
Glassner, Martin Ira. 1993. Political Geography. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Gleditsch, Kristian S. 1999. Peace Has Its Victories, No Less Renowned Than War:
A Local Interaction Approach to Regional Con°ict, Integration, and Democratization Ph. D. thesis. University of Colorado Boulder, Colorado, USA.
Gleditsch, Kristian S. and Michael D. Ward. 2000a. \Interstate System Membership:
A Revised List of Independent States since 1816." International Interactions
25:393{341.
Gleditsch, Kristian S. and Michael D. Ward. 2000b. \The Role of Geography in World
Politics: A Minimum Distance Database, 1875{Present." tba NA:NA.
Gleditsch, Kristian S. and Michael D. Ward. 2000c. \War and Peace in Space and
Time: The Role of Democratization." International Studies Quarterly 44:1{29.
Gotway, Carol and Walter Stroup. 1997. \A Generalized Linear Model Approach to
Spatial Data Analysis and Prediction." Journal of Agricultural, Biological, and
Environmental Statistics 2:157{178.
Gumpertz, Marcia L., Chi-tsung Wu and John M. Pye. 1999. Logistic Regression
for Southern Pine Beetle Outbreaks with Spatial and Temporal Autocorrelation.
Technical Report 2513 Institute of Statistics, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC.
Gumpertz, Marcia L., Jonathan M. Graham and Jean B. Ristaino. 1997. \Autologistic
Model of Spatial Pattern of Phytophthora Epidemic in Bell Pepper: E®ects
of Soil Variables on Disease Presence." Journal of Agricultural, Biological, and
Environmental Statistics 2:131{156.
Hess, Gregory D. 1995. \An Introduction to Lewis Fry Richardson and His Mathematical Theory of War and Peace." Con°ict Management and Peace Science
14:77{113.
Hoeting, Jennifer A., Molly Leecaster and David Bowden. 1999. \An Improved Model
for Spatially Correlated Binary Responses." Journal of Agricultural, Biological
and Environmental Statistics 4.
H¿ivik, Tord and Johan V. Galtung. 1971. \Structural Violence: A Note on Operationalization." Journal of Peace Research 7:73{76.

REFERENCES

22

Hu®er, Fred W. and Hulin Wu. 1998. \Markov Chain Monte Carlo for Autologistic Regression Models with Application to the Distribution of Plant Species."
Biometrics 54(2):509.
Kirby, Andrew M. and Michael D. Ward. 1987. \The Spatial Analysis of Peace and
War." Comparative Political Studies 20:293{313.
Kjellen, Rudolf. 1916. Staten som Lifsform [The State as an Organism]. Stockholm:
Hugo Geber.
LeSage, James P. 1999.
Spatial Econometrics using MATLAB.
www.econ.utoledo.edu.

The Web:

Mackinder, Halford J. 1904. \The Geographical Pivot of History." The Geographical
Journal 23:421{444. paper read to the Royal Geographical Society, April 1904.
Mackinder, Halford J. 1919. Democratic Ideas and Reality: A Study in the Politics
of Reconstruction. London: Constable.
Mans¯eld, Edward and Jack Snyder. 1995. \Democratization and the Danger of
War." International Security 20:5{38.
Mans¯eld, Edward and Jack Snyder. 1997. \A Reply to Thompson and Tucker."
Journal of Con°ict Resolution 41:457{461.
Most, Benjamin A. and Harvey Starr. 1980. \Di®usion, Reinforcement, Geo-Politics
and the Spread of War." American Political Science Review 74:932{946.
Most, Benjamin A. and Harvey Starr. 1989. Inquiry, Logic, and International Politics.
Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press.
Nicholson, Michael. 1999. \Lewis Fry Richardson and the Study of the Causes of
War." British Journal of Political Science 29:541{563.
O'Loughlin, John V. 1986. \Spatial Models of International Con°ict: Extending
Current Theories of War Behavior." Annals of the American Association of Geographers 76:60{83.
Ord, J. Keith. 1975. \Estimation Methods for Models of Spatial Interactions." Journal
of the American Statistical Association 70:120{126.
¶ Tuathail, Gear¶oid. 1996. Critical Geopolitics. London: Routledge.
O
Rapoport, Anatol. 1963. Mathematical Models of Social Interaction. In Handbook
of Mathematical Psychology, ed. R. Duncan Luce, Robert R. Bush and Eugene
Galanter. New York: Wiley pp. 493{579.

REFERENCES

23

Rashevski, Nicholai. 1949. Mathematical Theory of Human Relations. Bloomington:
IN: Principia Press.
Ratzel, Friedrich. 1879. Politische Geographie. Munich: Oldenburg.
Richardson, Lewis F. 1960a. Arms and Insecurity. Chicago and Pittsburgh, PA:
Quadrangle/Boxwood.
Richardson, Lewis F. 1960b. Statistics of Deadly Quarrels. Chicago and Pittsburgh,
PA: Quadrangle/Boxwood.
Richardson, Lewis F. 1992. The Problem of Contiguity: An Appendix to Statistics
of Deadly Quarrels. In Collected Papers of Lewis Fry Richardson, ed. Oliver M.
Ashford, P.G. Drazin, J.C.R. Hunt, Paul Smoker and Ian Sutherland. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Rummel, Rudolph J. 1995. Death by Government. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Shin, Michael E. and Michael D. Ward. 1999. \Lost in Space: Political Geography
and the Defense-Growth Trade-o®." Journal of Con°ict Resolution 43:793{816.
Singer, J. David, ed. 1979. The Correlates of War I: Research Origins and Rationale.
New York: Free Press.
Singer, J. David, ed. 1980. The Correlates of War II: Testing Some Realpolitik Models.
New York: Free Press.
Singer, J. David and Melvin Small. 1972. The Wages of War, 1816-1965: A Statistical
Handbook. New York: Wiley.
Small, Melvin and J. David Singer. 1982. Resort to Arms: International and Civil
Wars, 1816-1980. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Sokal, Alan D. 1996. Monte Carlo Methods in Statistical Mechanics: Foundations
and New Algorithms: Lectures from the Cargese Summer School on \Functional
Integratin: Basics and Applications". Technical report Department of Physics,
New York University.
Sorokin, Pitirim A. 1957. Social and Cultural Dynamics. London: Owen.
Taylor, Peter and Colin Flint. 1999. Political Geography: World-Economy, NationState and Locality. London: Longman.
Thompson, William R. and Richard M. Tucker. 1997. \A Tale of Two Democratic
Peace Critiques." Journal of Con°ict Resolution 41:428{54.
Wallensteen, Peter and Margareta Sollenberg. 1999. \Armed Con°ict, 1989-98." Journal of Peace Research 36:593{606.

REFERENCES

24

Ward, Michael D. 1988. \Cargo Cult Social Science and Eight Fallacies of Comparative Political Research." International Studies Notes 13(1):75{77.
Ward, Michael D. and Andrew M. Kirby. 1987. \Re-examining Spatial Models of International Con°ict." Annals of the American Association of Geographers 77:86{
105.
Ward, Michael D. and Kristian S. Gleditsch. 1998. \Democratizing for Peace." American Political Science Review 92(1):51{61.
Wright, Quincy. 1942. A Study of War. Reprinted 1957 ed. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

