Recidivism and Social Interactions∗
(To Appear in the Journal of the American Statistical Association)
Sibel Sirakaya†
University of Washington, Seattle

Working Paper no. 52
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
University of Washington
October 2005

∗

Financial support from “The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation: Network on Social
Interactions and Economic Inequality” and “The Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation” is gratefully
acknowledged. I would like to thank Steven N. Durlauf for his support, advice and encouragement. I
would also like to thank Nedim M. Alemdar, William A. Brock, Adrian Raftery and Larry Samuelson,
as well as the seminar participants at Bilkent University, Koc University, Penn State University, Purdue
University, Sabanci University, Vanderbilt University, University of Miami, University of Washington and
University of Wisconsin-Madison for their valuable suggestions and comments. Finally, I would like to
thank an anonymous referee for helpful suggestions and the editor of the Journal of the American Statistical
Association (Applications and Case Studies), Mark S. Kaiser, for his careful reading of the earlier versions of
the manuscript and constructive criticism for improving the manuscript. The usual caveat applies however:
all errors are mine.
†
Sibel Sirakaya is an Assistant Professor of Economics and Statistics, Department of Economics and
Statistics, and Center for Statistics and Social Sciences, University of Washington, Campus Box 354320
Seattle, WA 98195-4320. Email: sirakaya@u.washington.edu.

1

Abstract
Using a national sample, this paper identifies the risk factors for recidivism among
Female, Male, Black, White and Hispanic felony probationers. The individual hazard
function is assumed to depend on individual and neighborhood characteristics as well
as social interactions among probationers. In selecting the covariates from a set of
potential candidates, Bayesian model averaging is used both to account for model
uncertainty and the subsequent inference. The results point to social interactions as one
of the most significant factors affecting recidivism among all gender, ethnicity and race
groups. When a frailty parameter is added to account for the possibility of unobserved
risk factors shared by probationers within neighborhoods, the empirical results remain
robust indicating negligible unobserved neighborhood-level heterogeneity.
Keywords:
averaging

Recidivism; Social interactions; Model uncertainty; Bayesian model

2

1

Introduction

According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics Correctional Surveys (as presented in Correctional Populations in the United States, Annual, Prisoners in 2003 and Probation and
Parole in the United States, 2003), the prison and jail population in the United States grew
from approximately 1.14 million in 1990 to slightly more than 2 million in 2003. There were
an estimated 482 prison inmates per 100,000 U.S. residents in 2003, as opposed to 292 at
the year end 1990. By the end of 2003, the state prisons were operating between 1 and 16
percent, while the federal prisons were operating 39 percent above capacity. In the face of
overcrowded prisons, probation for adults convicted of felony crimes has become a major
alternative sentencing in the United States (Benedict and Huff-Corzine, 1997; Petersilia et
al., 1985). The number of probationers surpassed 4 million by the end of 2003, up from
nearly 2.7 million on December 31, 1990. An estimated 49 percent of all probationers were
convicted of a felony.
The swelling probationer population has also stirred a growing debate as to the proper
use of probation sentencing in the justice system. Some have argued that recidivism by felony
probationers poses a potential threat to the public safety (e.g. Irish, 1989; Petersilia, 1985).
Others, however, have concluded that felony probation constitutes not only a viable, but
also a cheaper and perhaps more rehabilitative alternative to incarceration (e.g. Benedict
and Huff-Corzine, 1997; Clarke et al., 1988; McGaha et al., 1987; Vito, 1986; Whitehead,
1991).
4.5

Adult Correctional Population (Millions)

4

3.5

Pro

3

ion
bat

2.5

2

1.5

Prison

1

Parole

0.5
Jail
0
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Year

Figure 1.1: Adult Correctional Populations in the United States, 1980-2003.
In view of the situation, it is imperative for policy makers to rethink the mission and the
structure of the probation system. In this regard, a proper identification of the risk factors
for recidivism among felony probationers becomes crucial for a better risk assessment as well
as for designing more effective prevention policies. This paper attempts both to bring a
theoretical perspective on recidivism as an outcome of interdependent decision making by
probationers, and also to suggest an empirical model to properly identify those factors that
increase the risk of recidivism. Towards that, first, an empirical framework is developed
for recidivism as a Cox proportional hazard model which also includes social interactions.
3

Then, model uncertainty is accounted for by employing Bayesian model averaging (BMA) for
the selection of covariates and the subsequent inference. Finally, the study uses a national
sample to identify the risk factors for recidivism among Female, Male, Black, White and
Hispanic felony probationers.
The paper extends the earlier research on recidivism in a number of directions. Conceptually, it departs from its precedents by bringing forth social interactions as a potential
risk factor. This is important for policy making as social interactions are accompanied by
social multipliers that magnify a singular change in an individual’s decision to culminate in a
much larger change in the population behavior. Consequently, preventing an individual from
recidivating may help reduce the future crime rates by more than what that single individual
would have committed. Moreover, social interactions can generate multiple equilibria due
again to social multipliers. Even when the group behavior is uniquely determined by fundamentals, a small change in fundamentals may lead to large differences in group behavior.
Thus, social multiplier effects may also account for the large spatial differences in recidivism
rates reported by the previous studies (ranging from a low of 22 percent in Kentucky (Vito,
1986) to a high of 65 percent in California (Petersilia, 1985)).
The previous literature has typically identified risk factors using stepwise methods, with
the single model selected by the procedure used for subsequent statistical analysis. A serious
shortcoming of any such procedure is that the reported uncertainty for the values such as
future predictions or parameter estimates reflects only within model uncertainty, ignoring
between model uncertainty-the uncertainty associated with the model selection procedure
itself. The paper employs BMA to account for model uncertainty as well, and shows that
BMA leads to a better evaluation of the risk factors for recidivism, as well as improved risk
assessment for the potential recidivists.
An additional contribution of the study is the scope of the data set, which is a large
national sample that includes felony probation cases from each of the major regions in the
United States. Thus, we are able to delineate more clearly the differences in recidivism
experiences of racial and ethnic groups across jurisdictions.
From the empirical analysis, social interactions emerge as one of the most significant
contributor to recidivism among all gender, ethnicity and race groups. Among other significant factors are: being male, being young, lack of employment, having a drug abuse history
and prior felony convictions, and living in neighborhoods with high serious violent crime per
capita for Blacks; being male, being young, lack of employment, having a drug abuse history
and prior felony convictions, being convicted of a property offense, robbery or drug trafficking, and living in Republican neighborhoods for Whites; being young, lack of employment,
having a drug abuse history and being convicted of a property offense, robbery or drug trafficking for Hispanics; lack of employment, having prior felony convictions and being under
stringent supervision during probation for Females; being young, lack of employment and
education, having a drug abuse history and prior felony convictions, and living in neighborhoods with low percentages of persons below poverty level for Males. The empirical results
remain robust when a frailty parameter is added to account for the possibility of unobserved
risk factors shared by probationers within neighborhoods.
The balance of the paper is as follows. Section 2 provides a brief review of the literature
on recidivism and interactions-based crime models. Section 3 develops an interactions-based
4

model of recidivism within the tradition of Cox proportional hazard models. In Section 4,
BMA is introduced and its extension to variable selection in the recidivism model is discussed.
Section 5 introduces the data set. Section 6 reports and interprets the results of the BMA
analysis. The robustness of the findings is tested and a comparison is done with stepwise
methods. Conclusions follow.

2

Literature

Existing studies report significant spatial differences in recidivism rates among felony probationers, from a low of 22 percent in Kentucky (Vito, 1986) to a high of 65 percent in California
(Petersilia, 1985). Despite these large spatial differences, prior research has focused solely
on individual characteristics and criminal history of probationers in a single state or in a
number of counties, ignoring the potential influence of various types of interactions among
probationers on the differential recidivism experiences across locales. Age, race, education,
income, marital status, prior criminal history, and type of crime committed are among the
risk factors reported as significant (Petersilia, 1985; Vito, 1986; McGaha et al., 1987; Clarke
et al., 1988; Irish, 1989; Benedict and Huff-Corzine, 1997).
More recently, the crime literature in economics has turned to models that explicitly
incorporate interactions among criminals to explain the differential crime rates across locales.
However, to the best of my knowledge, there is no study on recidivism of felons on probation
per se. Before conceptualizing recidivism within the context of social interactions, a brief
review of some of the key results on crime and social interactions in economics literature is
in order.
In Sah (1991), police cannot arrest more than a fixed number of criminals. Thus, the
larger the number of criminals, the lower the probability of arrest, which in turn reduces the
cost of engaging in a criminal activity. Freeman et al. (1996) argue that high crime rates
today may cause some youths to postpone investments in human capital-they may drop out
of high school lured by the prospects of higher returns on criminal activities today. This
will in turn cause inertia in criminal behavior since undereducated youth will have limited
access to legal opportunities and hence will be more prone to commit crimes in the future.
On the empirical side, in order to explain the large cross-sectional variation of crime rates,
Glaeser et al. (1996) model interactions among individuals within cities. They suggest that
interdependencies between agents’ decisions about crime (social interactions) are necessary
to explain the high variability of crime rates across space. They argue that if agents’ decisions
were independent, then city crime levels would have represented the averages of large numbers
of independent decisions, and thus should have been closer to the expected population means.
In the absence of interdependent decisions, the large differences in crime rates across space
must then be explained by sufficiently different economic conditions (or levels of deterrence)
in the different areas. They claim, however, that less than 30 percent of the variation in
cross-city rates can be explained by differences in local area characteristics based on OLS
regressions that control for local area attributes. The remaining variance is too high to be
compatible with a model where agents’ decisions about crime are independent.
Glaeser et al. (1996) identify statistical independence with the absence of interdependent decisions. However, even in the absence of social interactions, agents within a city may
5

behave similarly because they have similar individual characteristics and/or face the same
institutional environments, or the crime rates may vary with the exogenous characteristics
of the group of agents within a city. This implies that even in the absence of social interactions, city crime levels may not represent the averages of large numbers of independent
decisions. The empirical model in the present study improves upon Gleaser et al. (1996) by
disentangling the covariations in times to recidivism that are due to agents’ interdependent
choices, social interactions, from the covariations that originate from the exogenous and/or
correlated social effects mentioned above.

3
3.1

Model
Basic Ideas

Manski (1995, p.128) classifies social effects into three types. The first is endogenous social
effects, which arise when choices made by an individual are affected, not through market
transactions, by actions of the others. Social learning, conformity and sanctions are some
of the mechanisms giving rise to endogenous social effects. Endogenous social effects imply
that the net benefit of recidivating increases as others also recidivate (e.g., while one person
is being arrested, it might be harder to arrest someone else for the police). Throughout the
study, I use the term social interactions for endogenous social effects in keeping with Brock
and Durlauf (2001a, 2001b). The second type of social effects is contextual (or exogenous)
effects, which occur when an individual’s behavior is affected by the exogenous characteristics
of the group of which he is a member. For instance, contextual effects appear if recidivism
rates vary with the socioeconomic composition of groups. Finally, correlated effects occur
when individuals of the same group behave similarly because they have similar individual
characteristics or face the same institutional environments, such as state sentencing and
incarceration practices.
To see the difference between various social effects, consider a recidivism prevention
program that successfully decreases the recidivism rate for a group of probationers who are
drug abusers and known to engage in criminal activity to ‘feed’ their drug habit. Whether
there exists social interactions depends on the prevention mechanism involved. If the program
decreases the likelihood of recidivating, say, through providing a free drug treatment, then
there is a correlated effect according to Manski’s definition. However, if the probationer’s
use of drug treatment depends on the commonness of the probationers who also receive
treatment in the group, then a social interaction exists. This may be due to, for example,
social learning. Probationers who receive the treatment may communicate with others as to
the benefits of drug treatment, decreasing the uncertainty faced by succeeding probationers,
thereby increasing its use.
From a policy-making perspective, the distinction between exogenous social effects and
social interactions is important because social interactions generate social multipliers, causing
a singular change in one individual’s decision to culminate in a multiple change in the
population behavior. Preventing one person from recidivating may then help reduce the
future recidivism rates by more than what that single individual would have committed.
Consider the recidivism prevention program example. In the presence of social interactions,
6

a probationer’s decision not to recidivate, will, through for example social learning, decrease
the likelihood of recidivating by the others. Thus, a policy that targets, and operates through
social interactions will have a very different effect on recidivism than a policy that changes
only the exogenous determinants.

3.2

Recidivism and Social Interactions

This section develops an empirical model that allows us to statistically disentangle the contribution of social interactions to recidivism from the contributions of exogenous and correlated
social effects. Social interactions are modelled as affecting the probability of transition from
one state (remaining crime free) to another (recidivating). Using the standard notation (e.g.
Amemiya, 1985), let T denote the duration from t = 0 that a probationer remains crime
free. The probability that this duration is less than t, P r(T < t), is denoted as F (t). For
any interval δt, the probability that a crime free probationer at t recidivates by t + δt is
P r(t ≤ T < t + δt|T ≥ t) =

P r(t ≤ T < t + δt, T ≥ t)
P r(T ≥ t)

(3.1)

From Eq. (3.1), two standard functions of interest can be defined. First, the hazard function
λ(t) is defined as
P r(t ≤ T < t + δt|T ≥ t)
F 0 (t)
=
δt→0
δt
1 − F (t)

λ(t) = lim

Second, the survivor function S(t) is defined as 1 − F (t)
Z t
S(t) = exp[−
λ(z)dz]

(3.2)

(3.3)

0

Cox (1972) proportional hazard model specifies the hazard rate for individual i with
covariate vector zi to be
λ(t, zi ) = λ0 (t)exp(θ0 zi )

(3.4)

where λ0 (t) is the baseline hazard function at time t, left unspecified in Cox’s formulation,
and θ is a vector of unknown parameters.
In the context of recidivism, the hazard function for probationer i is assumed to depend on
i’s individual characteristics, xi , characteristics of i’s neighborhood, yn(i) , and i’s subjective
e
e
e
expectation of a neighborhood behavioral measure, men(i) = (νn(i)
, ωn(i)
)0 , where νn(i)
and
e
ωn(i) are i’s subjective expectations of the proportion of probationers who recidivate by some
duration τ in i’s neighborhood and the mean time to recidivate among them, respectively.
Since, a probationer is required to live in the jurisdiction that passed the probation sentence,
the neighborhood of probationer i, n(i), is assumed to be the jurisdiction. That is, in the
current context, probationers do not endogenously coalesce into neighborhoods. Hence, Eq.
(3.4) takes the following form
λ(t, xi , yn(i) , men(i) ) = λ0 (t)exp(α0 xi + β 0 yn(i) + J 0 men(i) )
7

(3.5)

The probability that probationer i recidivates by duration t is given by
F (t | xi , yn(i) , men(i) ) = 1 − exp[−Λ0 (t)exp(α0 xi + β 0 yn(i) + J 0 men(i) )]

(3.6)

Rt
where Λ0 (t) = 0 λ0 (z)dz is an integrated baseline hazard. The associated density for the
time to recidivate is
f (t | xi , yn(i) , men(i) ) = λ0 (t)exp(α0 xi + β 0 yn(i) + J 0 men(i) )
0

0

× exp[−Λ0 (t)exp(α xi + β yn(i) + J

(3.7)
0

men(i) )]

and the expected time to recidivate for probationer i, conditional on these controls, is
Z ∞
e
E(t | xi , yn(i) , mn(i) ) =
tf (t | xi , yn(i) , men(i) )dt
(3.8)
0

To close the model, it is necessary to specify how expectations are formed. I assume that
probationers all possess rational expectations. Thus

 Z
X
dFx
F (τ | xi , yn(i) , mn(i) )


e


i∈n(i)
(3.9)
mn(i) = mn(i) =  Z

I{i∈ψn(i) } E[t | xi , yn(i) , mn(i) ]dFx
where Fx is the probability distribution of individual characteristics within neighborhood
n(i), ψn(i) is the set of probationers who recidivate by duration τ in neighborhood n(i), and
(
1 if i ∈ ψn(i) ,
I{i∈ψn(i) } =
(3.10)
0 otherwise.
Letting zi = (x0i , y0n(i) , m0 en(i) )0 and θ = (α0 , β 0 , J 0 )0 , the associated likelihood function for the
data is given by
L=

n
Y

0

0

λ0 (ti )exp(θ zi )exp[−Λ0 (ti )exp(θ zi )]

i=1

I
Y

exp[−Λ0 (ti )exp(θ0 zi )]

(3.11)

i=n+1

where ti , i = 1, 2, . . . , n are the completed spells (probationer i recidivated at time ti ), and
spells ti , i = n + 1, . . . , I are right censored at time ti (i.e., these are the spells that were
ongoing at the end of the observation period). Eq. (3.11) assumes that there are no ties
between times of failure; for simplicity, I do not consider modifications needed when there
are ties.
Combining the exponential functions that appear in both terms, and rewriting the combined term




n

 Z ∞ X
Y
0
0


exp(θ zi ) λ0 (t)dt
(3.12)
L=
λ0 (ti )exp(θ zi )exp −


0
i=1

h∈R(t)

8

where R(t) = {i|ti ≥ t}. Cox’s partial maximum likelihood θˆ maximizes
L1 =

n
Y

exp(θ0 zi )
X
exp(θ0 zi )

i=1

(3.13)

h∈R(ti )

L1 is a part of L because as L can be written as L = L1 L2 , where
L2 =

n
Y
i=1








 Z ∞ X

exp(θ0 zi ) λ0 (t)dt
exp(θ0 zi )λ0 (ti ) exp −

 0



X
h∈R(ti )

(3.14)

h∈R(t)

Because L1 does not depend on λ0 (t), θ can be estimated without specifying λ0 (t). Identification in population requires that the expected value of the Hessian matrix of logL1 is
nonsingular at the self-consistent solution (3.9). Identification is a concern in interactionsbased models as the group versus individual determinants of individual behavior are likely
to be correlated (See Brock and Durlauf (2001a) for an extensive discussion of identification
in social interactions-based models). However, it is not an issue here as, by (3.9), group and
individual determinants are nonlinearly related.

4

Accounting for Model Uncertainty with Bayesian
Model Averaging

To proceed further, a specific collection of covariates should be selected. The standard
approach to model selection is to search over many classes of models, usually through stepwise
methods (Efroymson, 1960), and then pick the one that “best” fits the data. Once the model
is “found”, then it is used for the subsequent statistical analysis, the results are reported
and interpreted. The reported uncertainty for the values such as the future predictions or
the parameter estimates, however, reflects only within model uncertainty. Ignoring between
model uncertainty–uncertainty associated with the model selection procedure itself–results
in the underestimation of overall uncertainty, overestimation of a particular model being
“correct” and poorer predictive ability (Chatfield, 1995; Draper, 1995; Madigan and Raftery,
1994; Volinsky, 1997; Volinsky, et al. 1997).
One possible approach to model uncertainty is to obtain several potential “best” models,
each of which is strongly supported by the data. Though this approach addresses model
uncertainty, it does not offer a way to combine the results of different models and to interpret
the results when the models indicate qualitatively different conclusions.
Bayesian solution to this problem is to select a number of most likely models from a set
of potential candidates and then to combine the results from the former by averaging with
weights based on the posterior probabilities, a method known as Bayesian model averaging.
BMA approach accounts for model uncertainty in both predictions and parameter estimates.
The resulting estimates of uncertainty incorporate between model uncertainty and thus may
better reflect the true uncertainty in the estimates. The following section provides a brief
overview of how BMA can be extended to Cox proportional hazards model as suggested by
Volinsky et al. (1997).
9

4.1

Bayesian Model Averaging and Cox Proportional Hazard

Let ∆ be any unknown quantity of interest and M={M1 , . . . , MK } be the set of all models
under consideration. The posterior distribution of ∆ given the data D is
P r(∆|D) =

K
X

P r(∆|Mk , D)P r(Mk |D)

(4.1)

k=1

which is an average of the posterior distributions under each model weighted by the corresponding posterior model probabilities. The posterior probability for model Mk is given
by
P r(D|Mk )P r(Mk )
P r(Mk |D) = PK
l=1 P r(D|Ml )P r(Ml )
where
P r(D|Mk ) =

(4.2)

Z
P r(D|θk , Mk )P r(θk |Mk )dθk

(4.3)

is the integrated likelihood of model Mk , θk is the vector of parameters of model Mk ,
P r(θk |Mk ) is the prior density of θk under model Mk , P r(D|θk , Mk ) is the likelihood, and
P r(Mk ) is the prior probability that Mk is the true model. All probabilities are implicitly
conditional on M, the set of all models under consideration.
The predictive distribution of ∆ given a particular model Mk , P r(∆|Mk , D), is found by
integrating out the model parameter θk :
Z
P r(∆|Mk , D) = P r(∆|θk , Mk , D)P r(θk |Mk , D)dθk
(4.4)
When there are many potential covariates, the finite sum (4.1) can quickly become unmanageable. Madigan and Raftery (1994) suggest averaging only over the “best” models as
an approximation to averaging over all models, where “best” is determined by the posterior
model probability. Thus, only models belonging to the set below are included in the sum
(4.1).
½
¾
maxl {P r(Ml |D)}
A = Mk :
≤C
(4.5)
P r(Mk |D)
It is shown in Madigan and Raftery (1994) and Raftery et al. (1997) that C = 20
provides a good approximation to averaging over the entire model space. In the following
BMA analysis of recidivism, C = 20 is used, and averaging is done only over models with
posterior model probabilities at least 1/20 of that of the best model.
Eq. (4.1) has three components that are hard to compute. The first is the predictive
distribution, P r(∆|Mk , D). The integral (4.4) does not have a closed form solution for the
Cox-proportional hazard models. Volinsky et al. (1997) use the MLE approximation:
P r(∆|Mk , D) ≈ P r(∆|Mk , θˆk , D)

(4.6)
10

The second integral (4.3), the integrated likelihood P r(D|Mk ), is in general also intractable in survival regression models. In regular statistical models (those in which MLE is
consistent and asymptotically normal), Raftery (1996) suggests that Laplace transforms be
used for approximation. Consequently, we have
P r(D|Mk ) = logP r(D|θˆk , Mk ) − (dk /2)logn + O(1)

(4.7)

where dk is the dimension of θk and n is the total number of cases. Note that the resulting
expression is the approximation to Bayesian information criterion (BIC) derived in Schwarz
(1978).
To proceed further with Eq.(4.2), model priors need to be specified. As a plausible and
perhaps also a “neutral” choice, all recidivism models under consideration are assumed to
be a priori equally likely. With quite large data spaces (involving up to 1012 models) and
about 20 data sets, previous research reports no perverse effects from putting uniform priors
over the models (Raftery et al., 1993; Madigan and Raftery, 1994; Madigan et al., 1996).
Finally, the best model (defined as that which has the largest BIC, corresponding to the
model with the highest posterior model probability) must be identified so that averaging can
be done over only those models with posterior probabilities no less than 1/C of the best
model. To efficiently identify the models in A, Volinsky, et al. (1997) propose the “leaps and
bounds” algorithm of Furnival and Wilson (1974) which was originally developed for model
selection in linear regression.
Linear regression by leaps and bounds provides the top q models of each model size,
where q is chosen by the user. The MLE θˆk , var(θˆk ), and R2 for each model Mk are also
returned. Using the fact that for two models A and B, where A and B are each subsets
of the full parameter set, if A ⊂ B then RSS (A)> RSS (B), the method eliminates large
portions of model space by sweep operations on the matrix:
¶
µ
X’X X’y
(4.8)
y’X y’y
which plays a key role in Lawless and Singhal (1978), who modifies the leaps and bounds
algorithm for nonlinear regression models. The method provides an approximate likelihood
ratio test statistics, and therefore, an approximate BIC value. Kuk (1984) uses the algorithm
in Cox regression models in order to find the single best model. Volinsky et al. (1997),
however, utilizes it to help locate the models in A that are to be averaged over.
The Lawless and Singhal method proceeds as follows: Let θ be the parameter vector of
the full model and let θk be the vector for a given submodel k. Rewrite θk as (θ1 , θ2 ) so that
Model Mk corresponds to the submodel θ2 = 0. Also, let
¶
µ
V11 V12
−1
(4.9)
V =I =
V120 V22
ˆ is the maximized likelihood under
denote the inverse observed information matrix. If L(θ)
˜ is the maximized likelihood under θ2 = 0, then
the full (unrestricted) model, and L(θ)
˜ − logL(θ)]
ˆ
Ω = −2[logL(θ)

(4.10)

is the usual likelihood ratio statistic for the test of the submodel versus the full model while
11

Ω0 = θˆ2 V22−1 θˆ2
is an approximation to Ω based on the Wald statistic. Finally, replace the matrix in (4.8)
with
µ
¶
I
I θˆ
θˆ0 I θˆ0 I θˆ
and perform the same matrix sweep operations from the leaps and bounds algorithm on it.
Thus, this revised algorithm provides
1. an estimate of the best q proportional hazards models for each model size,
2. the LRT approximation Ω0 for each model,
˜ the MLE for the parameters of the submodel, and
3. an approximation to θ,
4. the asymptotic covariance matrix V11−1
As long as q is large enough, this procedure returns the models in A plus many models
not in A. Volinsky et al. (1997) use the approximate LRT to reduce the remaining subset
of models to those most likely to be in A. This reduction step keeps only the models whose
posterior probabilities are at least 1/C 0 of the posterior model probability of the best model,
where C 0 is greater than C. For the recidivism model, it is assumed that C 0 = C 2 , which
turns out to be large enough to guarantee that no model in A will be lost.
The returned models are then estimated by standard survival regression technics, the
exact BIC value (corresponding to a posterior probability by Eq. (4.7)) for each is computed,
and those that are not in A are eliminated. The posterior model probabilities are then
normalized over the selected set. The posterior mean of the regression coefficients and
standard errors are as follows:
ˆ =
θˆBM A = EM (θ)

K
X

θˆk P r(Mk |D)

k=1

PK
= PKk=1

P r(Mk |D)θˆk

k:θk ∈Mk P r(Mk |D)

K
X

×

P r(Mk |D)

k:θk ∈Mk

= E[θˆ | θk ∈ Mk ] × P r(θ 6= 0)
which is the conditional posterior mean of θ multiplied by its posterior probability. For the
ˆ k , D). Then:
variance of the regression coefficient, let pk = P r(Mk |D) and Vk =Var(θ|M
K
X
2
ˆ
ˆ
V ar(θ) = E[θ ] − (
pk θˆk )2
k=1

=

K
X

K
X
2
ˆ
pk θˆk )2
pk (Vk + θk ) − (
k=1

k=1

=

K
X
k=1

pk Vk +

K
X
k=1

K
X
pk θˆk )2
pk θˆk2 − (
k=1

12

=

K
X
k=1

pk Vk +

K
X

pk (θˆk −

k=1

K
X

pk θˆk )2

k=1

The first term is the weighted variance across the models. The second component reflects
the stability of estimates. The higher the difference in estimates across models, the higher
will be the posterior variance. Hence, the standard errors directly take model uncertainty
into account.
The posterior probability that a regression coefficient is nonzero is calculated by adding
the posterior probabilities from all the models that contain the specific variable. The interpretation of a posterior probability is as follows: less than 50%: evidence against the effect;
50-75%: weak evidence for the effect; 75-95%: positive evidence; 95-99%: strong evidence;
and greater than 99%: very strong evidence (Kass and Raftery, 1995).

4.2

Predictive Performance

To assess the predictive performance of BMA relative to competing methods, Volinsky et al.
(1997) suggest the following procedure. First, randomly split the data set into two halves
and then apply model selection methods to the one half, called the build data (DB ). Next,
define a predictive density for each method in the remaining half, the test data, or DT , from
the corresponding coefficient estimates. Then, a log score for any given model Mk is based
on the observed ordinate of the predictive density for the methods in DT :
X
logP r(d|Mk , DB )
(4.11)
d∈DT

Similarly, the predictive log score for BMA is




X
X
P r(d|M, DB )P r(M |DB )
log


d∈DT
M ∈M

(4.12)

where M is the set of models selected by BMA. The Cox model does not directly provide a
predictive density, but rather an estimated predictive CDF which is a step function (Breslow,
1975). Therefore, differentiation is not possible to obtain a density. In the spirit of Cox’s
partial likelihood (3.14), Volinsky et al. (1997) design an alternative to the predictive density:

wi





 exp(zT θˆ ) 

i k
X
P r(d|Mk , DB ) =
(4.13)
Tˆ 

exp(z
θ
)


k
h




h∈R(ti )

where wi is an indicator for whether or not subject i is censored. By substituting Eq. (4.13)
into Eq.s (4.11) and (4.12) above, an analogue to a log score (Good, 1952) called the partial
predictive score (PPS) is obtained. The PPS is larger for the method which assigns higher
probability to the events that occur in the test set.
13

5

Data

The data on individual characteristics, criminal histories and arrest activities of probationers
are obtained from the nation’s largest survey of felons on probation (U.S. Dept. of Justice,
Bureau of Justice Statistics. Recidivism of Felons on Probation, 1986-1989: [United States]
[Computer file]. Conducted by Mark A. Cunniff and the National Association of Criminal
Justice Planners. 2nd ICPSR ed. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political
and Social Research [producer and distributor], 1994.). The arrest activity of a sample
of 12,369 felons from 32 jurisdictions that represents the total of 306,000 felons from 100
jurisdictions who were sentenced to probation in 1986 was observed until about June 1990.
I also use data on jurisdiction characteristics, which are obtained from the City and County
Data Books of U.S. Census Bureau. The City and County Data Books provide jurisdiction
level data for the years 1985 and 1990.

5.1

A Brief Overview of the Data

The probationers who were out of study due probation violations or misdemeanor conviction
cases (3.8 percent of the sample), whose probation began before 1986 sentence (7.7 percent
of the sample) and for whom there is no information on arrest activity (8.2 percent of the
sample) are excluded from the analysis. Table 5.1 reports the percentage of probationers
who were rearrested over the data collection period for each gender, ethnicity and race group
in the remaining sample. The variables used in the study are described in Table 5.2. The
property taxes data for Baltimore City and St. Louis City used in the analysis are for the
fiscal year 1990-1991. The serious violent crimes included are rape, robbery, aggravated
assault, and homicide. ‘Supervision level’ and ‘Employment history’ variables are recoded so
that they have a natural ordering. Numbers reported in Tables 5.1 and 5.2 exclude missing
values.
Almost all cases in the sample have missing values for at least one of the variables. The
missingness of the variables included in the study ranges from a 0.5 percent (probation term)
to a 32.6 percent (supervision level). Missing data is handled with the multiple imputation
method. Missing values are imputed with the expectation maximization with importance
sampling (EMis) algorithm (King et al. 2001) to obtain five complete data sets. EMis can
be implemented using the public domain AMELIA software (Honaker et al. 2001).
Gender, Race and Ethnicity
Males
Females
Whites
Blacks
Amer. Indians/Alaskan Natives
Asians/Pacific Islanders
Hispanics
Total Sample

% Rearrested after probation sentencing
46.1
30.2
37.8
55.3
41.1
27.3
46.2
43.9

Table 5.1: Rearrest Rates by Gender, Race and Ethnicity

Jurisdictions included in the sample are reported in Table 5.3. Franklin County, OH is
excluded from the analysis due to its small representation in the sample.
14

Variable
Individual Characteristics

Range

Sex
Age

1≡ Male, 2≡ Female
1≡ Under 20
2≡ 20-24 years old
3≡ 25-29 years old
4≡ 30-39 years old
5≡ 40-49 years old
6≡ 50 and older
1≡ White, 2≡ Black
3≡ Amer. Indian/Alaskan Native
4≡ Asian/Pacific Islander
5≡ Other
1≡ Hispanic, 2≡ Non-Hispanic
1≡ Married/Widower
2≡ Divorced/Separated
3≡ Single
1≡ Grade school
2≡ Some high school
3≡ High school (GED)
4≡ Some college
5≡ College degree
1≡ None, 2≡ One
3≡ Two or more
1≡ No abuse
2≡ Occasional abuse
3≡ Frequent abuse
1≡ Administrative, 2≡ Minimum
3≡ Medium, 4≡ Maximum
5≡ Intense
1≡ Murder/nonneg manslaughter
2≡ Rape, 3≡ Robbery
4≡ Aggravated assault, 5≡ Burglary
6≡ Larceny/auto theft
7≡ Drug trafficking, 8≡ Other felony
1≡ Under 40%
2≡ 40-60%
3≡ 60% or more
1-144
0≡censored, 1≡rearrest

Race

Ethnicity
Marital status

Education level

Prior felony convictions
Drug abuse history

Supervision level

Type of crime committed

Employment history

Probation term (months)
Status
Jurisdiction Characteristics
Population, 1984
Non-white (%), 1984
Hispanic (%), 1990
Female-headed households with
children under age 18 (%), 1990
Persons over age 25 with 4 or
more years of college(%), 1990
Persons over age 25 with 12 or
more years of schooling(%), 1990
Persons below poverty level (%), 1989
Owner-occupied housing (%), 1990
Property taxes (%), 1986-1987
Republican votes cast for the
president (%), 1992
Serious violent crime per capita,
average of 1985 and 1991
Unemployment rate,1986

429,623-8,007,891
6.16-65.54
0.70-49.70

Time from probation to first felony rearrest (days)

1.14
2.97

1.49

1.78
2.33

2.54

1.36
1.77

2.82

5.60

1.96

45.46
0.44
1,769,749.56
21.34
14.74

33.40-64.20

54.34

14.90-42.20

24.31

60.70-88.20
3.70-24.60
17.87-80.45
13.70-97.90

76.43
13.13
56.43
65.98

15.90-48.80

32.93

0.002-0.103
3.90-10.30

0.014
6.31

1-1524

468.97

Table 5.2: Descriptions of the Variables Used in the Study

15

Mean

1. Baltimore City, MD
2. Baltimore County, MD
3. Bexar County, TX
4. Cook County, IL
5. Dade County, FL
6. Dallas County, TX
7. Denver, CO
8. Erie County, NY
9. Franklin County, OH
10. Harris County, TX
11. Hennepin County, MN

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Honolulu County, HI
Jefferson County, KY
King County, WA
Kings County, NY
Los Angeles County, CA
Maricopa County, AZ
Milwaukee County, WI
Monroe County, NY
Nassau County, NY
New York County, NY
Oklahoma County, OK

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

Orange County, CA
Philadelphia, PA
San Bernardino County, CA
San Diego County, CA
San Francisco, CA
Santa Clara County, CA
St. Louis City, MO
St. Louis County, MO
Suffolk County, NY
Ventura County, CA

Table 5.3: Jurisdictions Included in the Sample

5.2

Variables

Dependent Variable
Consistent with previous studies (e.g. Benedict and Huff-Corzine, 1997; Clark et al., 1988;
Irish, 1989; McGaha et al., 1987; Petersilia, 1985; Vito, 1987; Whitehead, 1991), the dependent variable is the first felony rearrest after probation sentencing. Specifically, I employ the
length of time from felony probation sentencing to a probationer’s first felony rearrest. Reviewing over 90 studies using the term recidivism, Maltz (1984) derives nine categories used
to indicate that recidivism has occurred: arrest, reconviction, incarceration, parole violation,
parole suspension, parole revocation, offense, absconding, and probation. He concludes that
“recidivism definition of choice appears to be ... arrest recidivism.” An additional advantage
of defining recidivism as rearrest is that the arrest data supplied by law enforcement agencies
are more complete and reliable than prosecutorial, court and correctional data. Thus, the
most practical measure of recidivism is rearrest (Benedict and Huff-Corzine, 1997; Shinnar
and Shinnar, 1975; Visher et al., 1991).
Potential Explanatory Variables
Social Interactions: Section 3.2 assumes that probationers reference on the entire group of
probationers in their neighborhoods through their subjective expectations of the withinneighborhood percentage of recidivists and the mean time to recidivate among them. Under
the self-consistency assumption, the percentage of recidivists in jurisdictions over the data
collection period and the average time to rearrest among them are employed to approximate
their population counterparts.
Gender: A small proportion of the sample, 13.6 percent, consists of females. Research on the
recidivism by the female offenders has been lacking as compared with the males. However,
gender might play an important role in the recidivist behavior of probationers.
Age: Prior research finds age as a significant factor affecting recidivism (e.g. Clarke et al.,
1988; Irish, 1989). It is generally reported that younger probationers are more likely than
older probationers to recidivate.
Race: The most common justification for the inclusion of race in the study of recidivism
is the over-representation of Blacks arrested, convicted and consequently sentenced in the
criminal justice system. For example, 59.6 percent of our sample consists of Whites, 36
16

percent consists of Blacks. While there are more Whites in the sample, the rearrest rate
while on probation is notably higher for Blacks; 55.3 percent compared to 37.8 percent for
Whites.
Ethnicity: Offenders are classified as Hispanic or Non-Hispanic in the sample. A small portion
of the sample, 22 percent, consists of Hispanics. However, the rearrest rate for Hispanics
is notably higher (46.2 percent) than that of Whites (37.8 percent). Prior research on the
treatment of Hispanics in the criminal justice system is inconclusive. Some studies conclude
that Hispanics are treated differently (e.g. LaFree, 1985; Mandel ,1979). Others, however,
indicate that there is little or no difference in their treatment (e.g. Unnever, 1981).
Marital Status: Prior research that include marital status (household composition) in their
models finds it as a significant factor affecting recidivism (Landis et al., 1969; Petersilia,
1985, Petersilia and Turner, 1990). In the sample, married probationers had a slightly lower
level of supervision than single probationers. Offenders with a spouse and/or children are
believed to be less likely to recidivate because of the responsibilities associated with having
a family and the stability the familial institution provides.
Education: Education is measured as the educational level attained at the time of the probation intake in the sample. Probationers who had an education level of high school and
below consist of 85.4 percent of the sample. According to a Bureau of Justice statistics
report “among U.S adults who neither graduated from a high school nor earned a general
equivalence degree (GED), almost 6 percent of Blacks and 1 percent of Whites were in a
Federal or State prison serving a sentence of one year or more” (Bureau of Justice Statistics,
1995).
Prior Felony Convictions: Prior research (Caldwell, 1951; England, 1955; Petersilia, 1985;
Vito, 1986) reports that a significant relationship exists between offenders who have previously been convicted of criminal activities and their likelihood of recidivism.
Drug Abuse History: Given this large percentage (49.7 percent) of drug abusers in the sample
and previous research findings (e.g. Benedict and Huff-Corzine, 1997; Caldwell, 1951; Clark
et al., 1988; Pritchard ,1979), drug abuse history may be a significant indicator of recidivism.
Supervision Level: The supervision level probationers were on during their probation term
may contribute to a probationer’s incentive to recidivate.
Type of Crime Committed: The probationers in the sample are classified based on the type
of crime committed that resulted in the probation sentence. Type of crime committed is
reported as one of the high-risk factors by Irish (1989).
Employment History: A probationer’s employment history is measured by the percentage of
time he/she was employed during the 12 months prior to presentence investigation in the
sample. It is argued that probationers with instable and low levels of employment have more
idle time for criminal activities. Caldwell (1951) and Pritchard (1979) report that instability
of employment significantly increases recidivism.
Probation term: Probation term in months ranges from 1 to 144 months in the sample. The
most common sentences were either 36 or 60 months. The basic justification for the inclusion
of this variable is that the longer an offender is on probation, the greater the likelihood he
17

would be caught committing an additional felony offense. Furthermore, it can be assumed
that a probationer with a longer sentence has generally committed a more serious offense
and/or has had a longer history of criminal behavior.
Neighborhood Characteristics: The neighborhood variables considered as potential explanatory variables are: jurisdiction population, percent persons over age 25 with 4 or more years
college, percent persons over age 25 with 12 or more years schooling, unemployment rate, percent persons below poverty level, percent owner-occupied housing units, percent non-White
population, percent Hispanic population, percent female-headed households with children
under age 18, percent Republican votes cast for the president, percent property taxes and
serious violent crime per capita.

6

Findings

BMA is implemented using “bic.surv” software by Chris T. Volinsky (available at
http://www.research.att.com/∼ volinsky/software/bic.surv). The empirical findings for the
whole sample, and the samples of Males, Females, Blacks, Whites and Hispanics are summarized in Table A.1 in Appendix. Reported are the posterior probabilities that the coefficients
are non-zero for the variables included in the analysis and their standard deviations across
completed data sets, and the posterior parameter estimates (means) and the standard deviations.
Following Rubin (1987), the posterior parameter estimates and probabilities that coefficients are non-zero are calculated by averaging over the individual estimates from the BMA
analysis of each completed data set. The variance of a posterior parameter estimate, on the
other hand, is the average of the estimated posterior variances from within each completed
data set, plus the sample variance in the posterior parameter estimates across the completed
data sets (multiplied by a factor that corrects for bias because the number of completed data
sets is finite). Hence, the reported standard deviations for the posterior parameter estimates
reflect not only model uncertainty, but also uncertainty due to missing data.
The results strongly support that social interactions contribute significantly to recidivism
among all gender, ethnicity and race groups. Among other significant factors are: being male,
being young, lack of employment, having a drug abuse history and prior felony convictions,
and living in neighborhoods with high serious violent crime per capita for Blacks; being male,
being young, lack of employment, having a drug abuse history and prior felony convictions,
being convicted of a property offense, robbery or drug trafficking, and living in Republican
neighborhoods for Whites; being young, lack of employment, having a drug abuse history
and being convicted of a property offense, robbery or drug trafficking for Hispanics; lack of
employment, having prior felony convictions and being under stringent supervision during
probation for Females; being young, lack of employment and education, having a drug abuse
history and prior felony convictions, and living in neighborhoods with low percentages of
persons below poverty level for Males.
A separate analysis of recidivism for each gender, race and ethnicity group proves to be
fruitful. Though, each group shares some common risk factors, there are also important
differences. This is intuitive as each social group may be subjected to different opportu18

nity sets. Becker (1971), for example, notes the structural discrimination minorities face in
the marketplace. In the context of criminal behavior, a criminal record would double the
“stigma” a minority person carries further dissipating the market opportunities and thereby
increasing the likelihood of a repeat offense.
The evidence from the data is inconclusive for some variables as to their effects on recidivism. Among these are: probation term, ethnicity and age for Females; percent Republican
votes cast for the president in the jurisdiction for Males; prior felony convictions, and percent
persons with 4 or more years of college and the mean rearrest time among recidivists in the
jurisdiction for Hispanics; percent Hispanic population in the jurisdiction for Whites; and
marital status, education and probation term for Blacks.
This does not necessarily mean, however, that these variables could be safely discarded.
In fact, they must be included in any prediction with weights proportional to their posterior
probabilities. Based on posterior probabilities a distinction can be made which is otherwise
not possible with P -values: a failure to reject the null hypothesis of “no effect” can be either
because of a lack of sufficient data to detect an effect, or because the data may simply
provide evidence for the null hypothesis. A posterior probability indicating “no effect” can
be construed as an approximation to the posterior probability of the effect being “small”,
namely P (|θ| < ²) provided that ² is at most about one half of the standard error (Berger
and Delampady, 1987).
Section 6.1 investigates the robustness of these findings. Specifically, to ensure that
there are no significant unobserved factors commonly shared by all probationers within
jurisdictions that might have given rise to the covariation in their times to recidivate, a
gamma frailty is introduced with a unit mean and an unknown variance. Consequently,
if the variance vanishes, then the frailty is identically one for all neighborhoods indicating
no unobserved neighborhood-level heterogeneity in the model. Next, for each sample the
BMA analysis is repeated which has indicated, in all cases, a frailty variance that is almost
zero. Thus, there does not exist any significant heterogeneity at the jurisdiction level that
is not accounted for by the model. Consequently, the coefficient estimates and the posterior
probabilities remain nearly the same.
To conclude the analysis in this section, BMA is compared with competing methods on
the basis of evaluation of the risk factors for recidivism and risk assessment for potential
recidivists. The predictive performance of BMA is tested with the sample for Blacks. The
test results show that BMA predicts the risk for recidivism 10.39% more effectively than a
method which picks the model based on the highest posterior model probability and 4.88%
more effectively than a stepwise method. The performance of BMA in evaluating the risk
factors is tested with the sample for Hispanics. The stepwise method is found in general to
overstate the evidence for an effect in comparison with BMA.
The Whole Sample
Posterior probabilities for sex, employment history, education, drug abuse history, prior
felony convictions, age, race, ethnicity, type of offense resulted in the probation sentence,
probation term, supervision level, percent Hispanic population and percent persons below
poverty level in the jurisdiction, and social interactions, as measured by the percent recidivists in the jurisdiction and the mean time to rearrest among them, indicate strong influences
19

on recidivism.
The risk of recidivism among Females is lower than that of Males. Having at least a high
school degree or GED reduces the likelihood of recidivism, so does a higher percentage of
time employed prior to probation.
More intensive drug abuse increases the risk of a repeat offense. One possible explanation
for this finding is that a probationer with a drug abuse history would possibly remain engaged
in criminal activities if only to feed the drug habit. Notice also that probationers with prior
felony convictions are at a higher risk of recidivating, all else being the same.
The age of an offender matters: the younger probationers are more likely to recidivate
than the older. Also important are the ethnic and racial background of the probationers.
As such, while Blacks and American Indians/Pacific Islanders are more likely to recidivate
than Whites, Hispanics are at a higher risk than all non-Hispanics. As for the type of offense
resulted in the probation sentence, probationers sentenced for property offenses (burglary,
larceny and auto theft), robbery and drug trafficking are at a higher risk of recidivating than
those convicted of murder or nonnegligent manslaughter.
A shorter probation term increases the likelihood of recidivism. This finding is surprising
as those who were given longer sentences have generally committed more serious offenses
and/or have a longer history of criminal behavior. One possible explanation for this finding is
that short sentences do not deter further criminal activity. That is, probationers who receive
light sentences may rationalize that the benefits of future crimes outweigh the potential
costs. Moreover, they may have less time to serve if reconvicted. More surprisingly, a more
strict supervision level indicates a higher risk of recidivism. One possible explanation for
this finding is that probationers who are under more stringent supervision are supervised
more closely and have fewer opportunities for criminal activity without detection. Also, they
possibly are more serious and habit offenders.
Interestingly, a higher percentage persons below poverty level, which can be considered
as a measure of economic well being in the neighborhood, decreases the chances of a repeat
offense. This could be possibly due to the lower propensity to commit property offenses
among the probationers. Also note that, there is strong evidence for the effect of percent
Hispanic population in the jurisdiction. An increase in percent Hispanic population in the
neighborhood slightly increases the risk of recidivism. Furthermore, though the data indicate
evidence against an effect for the percent Republican votes cast for the president and violent
serious crime per capita in the jurisdiction, the evidence is weak.
Finally, social interactions as measured by the percent recidivists in the neighborhood
and the mean time to rearrest among them, are significant. The higher the percentage of
probationers who recidivate in the jurisdiction of a probationer (the lower the mean time to
rearrest among them), the higher will be the risk of recidivism for the probationer.
Males
The results when only the male probationers are considered, replicate closely those for the
overall sample. This is probably due to the over-representation of Males in the sample.
The variables for which the BMA analysis indicates strong evidence for an effect for the
whole sample (except sex of course) are also relevant for Males, with slightly lower posterior
probabilities for probation term and percent persons below poverty level in the jurisdiction,
20

and a slightly higher posterior probability for the mean rearrest time among recidivists in
the jurisdiction.
Females
The female offenders make up a much smaller proportion of the correctional population than
the male offenders. For example, only 22 percent of the adults on probation were women
during 2001. As a result, research on the recidivism by the female offenders has been lacking
as compared with the males. However, those risk factors which can successfully assess the
risk of recidivism among the male probationers may fail to do so for the females. Hence, a
separate analysis of recidivist behavior among female probationers is of interest.
The posterior probabilities for employment history, prior felony convictions, type of offense resulted in the probation sentence, supervision level, and social interactions, as measured by the percentage of recidivists in the jurisdiction, indicate strong evidences for an
effect on the female recidivism. Moreover, the effect of each of these variables is stronger compared to the whole sample and Males. The female probationers who are put on more strict
supervision, convicted of property offenses, robbery and drug trafficking, were employed for
a lower percentage of time prior to probation sentence, and live in jurisdictions with high
percentages of recidivists are more likely to recidivate. As different from the whole sample
and Males, the evidence is against an effect of the mean rearrest time among recidivists in
the jurisdiction on recidivism. That is, for Females, not how quickly the probationers in
their neighborhood recidivate but their number matters. Furthermore, the relation of employment history to recidivism is different from the whole sample and Males. Though, female
probationers who were employed 40% or more of the time prior to probation are less likely
to recidivate than those who were employed under 40% of the time, the risk of recidivism is
lower for those who were employed between 40%-60% of the time than it is for those who
were employed over 60%.
Note also that the posterior probability for drug abuse history indicates weak evidence for
an effect; more intensive drug abuse increases the risk of recidivism. Finally, the evidence is
against but weak for age, ethnicity, probation term, and percent female-headed households,
percent persons with 4 or more years of college education and percent persons below poverty
level in the jurisdiction. The indecisiveness of the data is probably because Females make
up only 13.6% of the original sample. Though the findings indicate (weak) against evidence
for the age variable, its relation to recidivism, as employment history, is different from the
whole sample and Males. Female probationers 20 and over years of age are less likely to
recidivate than those under 20 years of age, but the risk of recidivism for those between ages
25-29 is higher than it is for those between ages 20 and 24, and ages 30 and above.
Whites
I analyze recidivism among Whites and Blacks separately. Because of their small representation, less than 4 percent of the original sample, I do not separately consider American
Indians, Alaskan Natives, Asians, Pacific Islanders and other races.
The BMA analysis of the sample of Whites provides strong evidence for an effect for
sex, employment history, prior felony convictions, drug abuse history, age, ethnicity, type of
21

offense resulted in the probation sentence, supervision level, percent persons below poverty
level in the jurisdiction and social interactions, as measured by the percent recidivists in the
jurisdiction. The interpretations are similar to the whole sample, with percent recidivists
in the jurisdiction having a higher effect on the recidivism of Whites compared to Males,
Females and the whole sample. As different from the whole sample and Males and similar
to Females, the evidence is against an effect of the mean rearrest time among recidivists in
the jurisdiction on recidivism.
Furthermore, the posterior probability indicates positive evidence for an effect of percent
Republican votes cast for the president in the jurisdiction. An increase in the percentage of Republican votes increases the risk of recidivism of Whites, albeight slightly. Also
note that the evidence is weak for an effect of education and probation term on recidivism.
Probationers with at least some high school education are less likely to recidivate, so do
probationers with longer probation sentences. Finally, the evidence is against but weak for
percent Hispanic population in the jurisdiction.
Blacks
The BMA analysis points to positive evidence for an effect for sex, employment history, prior
felony convictions, drug abuse history, age, type of offense resulted in the probation sentence,
supervision level, serious violent crime per capita in the jurisdiction and social interactions,
as measured by the percent recidivists in the jurisdiction and the mean time to rearrest
among them.
The interpretations are similar to the whole sample, with percent recidivists in the jurisdiction having a lower effect compared to all other samples, and the mean rearrest time
among recidivists variable having a higher effect compared to Males and the whole sample.
Also, as opposed to all other samples, the evidence is strong for serious violent crime per
capita in the jurisdiction. An increase in per capita violent serious crime substantially decreases the risk of recidivism. Considering the high number of Blacks arrested, convicted
and consequently sentenced in the criminal justice system, the police might become more
strict as serious violent crime increases, increasing the chance of being arrested.
The evidence is weak for percent Hispanic population and percent persons below poverty
level in the jurisdiction, and inconclusive for marital status, education, probation term,
jurisdiction population, and percent female-headed households and percent persons with 4
or more years of college in the jurisdiction.
Hispanics
The only other study in the literature which separately examines recidivism among Hispanic
probationers is Benedict and Huff-Corzine 1997. Unfortunately, however, the model used
in their study is not statistically significant. Hence, any significant results as to the factors
that contribute to recidivism among Hispanic felony probationers are of additional interest.
The BMA analysis suggests positive evidence for an effect for employment and drug
abuse histories, age, type of offense resulted in the probation sentence, supervision level,
percent owner-occupied housing in the jurisdiction and social interactions, as measured by
the percent recidivists in the jurisdiction. The interpretations are similar to the whole
22

sample. Similar to Females and Whites, the evidence is against for an effect of the mean
rearrest time among recidivists. However, as opposed to Females and Whites, it is weak for
Hispanics. Furthermore, the effect of percent recidivists on the recidivism of Hispanics is
similar to that of Whites, quite a bit higher compared the whole sample, Males, Females and
Blacks.
The evidence is weak for sex and prior felony convictions, and (weak) against for percent
non-White population, percent female-headed households, percent persons with 12 or more
years of schooling, percent persons below poverty level and serious violent crime per capita
in the jurisdiction, probation term and the mean rearrest time among recidivists in the
jurisdiction. The lack of conclusive evidence can perhaps be attributed to the fact that
Hispanics make up only 22% of the original sample.

6.1

Robustness

There could be sources of jurisdiction-level heterogeneity affecting the variability in observed
times to recidivism that might not have been captured with the covariates used in the analysis
in the previous section. Excess risk or frailty for distinct neighborhoods over and above any
measured covariates is known as overdispersion. Hence, if an overdispersion existed due
to unobserved and/or omitted factors shared by probationers within jurisdictions, and yet
neglected, the effect of social interactions on recidivism might have been overstated.
Overdispersion can be handled with a frailty model. A frailty model attempts to measure
the overdispersion by representing it as an unobservable multiplicative effect on the hazard,
or frailty. That is, the hazard for probationer i becomes
λ(t, xi , yn(i) , men(i) |ξ j ) = ξ j λ(t, xi , yn(i) , men(i) )
0

0

= ξ j λ0 (t)exp(α xi + β yn(i) + J

(6.1)
0

men(i) )

where ξ j is a random variable representing the unobserved heterogeneity specific to probationer i’s jurisdiction, j = n(i), that is assumed to be independent of the covariates.
Hence, from a proportional hazard perspective, it is easy to see how ξ j may correspond to
an omitted covariate (or set of covariates). A log-likelihood is obtained by conditioning on
the unobserved ξ and then integrating over its distribution.
To check the robustness of the results reported in the previous section, frailty is assumed
δ−1
to follow a gamma distribution with density function, f (ξ j ) = δ δ ξ j /Γ(δ), where δ is the
scale parameter and the distribution is normalized to have a unit mean and variance 1/δ = φ
is left unspecified for the purposes of identifiability. This also leads to a nice interpretation:
when the variance vanishes, the frailty is identically one for all the neighborhoods and there
is no heterogeneity in the model.
The gamma distribution is a commonly used and convenient heterogeneity distribution
as it gives a closed form expression for the log-likelihood, avoiding numerical integration.
Nonparametrically modelling frailty with a discrete mixing distribution is an alternative
approach. Even if the distribution of ξ j is unknown, the parameters can be consistently
estimated using an extension of the Heckman and Singer (1984) approach (Meyer, 1990).
However, as reported in Meyer (1990), this increases the computational burden. Further23

more, Guo and Rodriguez (1992) find that when combined with a flexible form of the baseline
hazard, there is little to favor the nonparametric approach over the parametric approach.
If ξ’s are viewed as missing data, the unobserved heterogeneity can be tackled with an
EM algorithm. However, the EM algorithm is relatively slow, and the variance estimates
require further computation. The results reported in this section are obtained using the
penalized partial log-likelihood approach. The details of the penalized partial log-likelihood
approach and its connection to the EM algorithm are extensively studied in Therneau et al.
(2000), and will not be repeated here.
Therneau et al. (2000) show that maximizing the penalized partial log-likelihood,
P P L = L1 (α, β, J, ξ; data) − g(ξ; φ)

(6.2)

over α, β, J and ξ coincides with the EM P
solution for any fixed value of φ. Here the
penalty function is given by g(ξ, φ) = −1/φ qj=1 [ξj − exp(ξj )], where q is the number of
neighborhoods and ξj = log(ξ j ). L1 is the log of the usual Cox partial likelihood developed
from an alternative version of the hazard which is equivalent to Eq. (6.1),
λ(t, xi , yn(i) , men(i) |ξj ) = λ0 (t)exp(α0 xi + β 0 yn(i) + J 0 men(i) + Bi ξ)

(6.3)

where B is matrix of q indicator variables such that Bij = 1 when subject i is a member of
neighborhood j and 0 otherwise, and each individual belongs to only one neighborhood.
Using the penalized partial log-likelihood approach, the BMA is applied to each completed
data set of each sample for the selection of potential covariates employed in the previous
section as before. Table 6.1.1 reports the estimated variance in frailty for each sample. The
reported variances are obtained by taking the average of the weighted average (with posterior
model probabilities as weights) of the BMA estimated variances in frailty over the completed
data sets.
As can be observed from Table 6.1.1, the estimated variances in frailty are very small for
all samples. These results imply that overdispersion due to unobserved/omitted covariates
is negligible. That is, the observed variables taken into account are sufficient to explain the
variability in times to recidivism across jurisdictions. Furthermore, since overdispersion is
very small, the values of the posterior parameter estimates, the standard deviations and the
probabilities that the coefficients are non-zero for each sample are very similar to their values
in the previous section. Thus, the findings in the previous section prove to be robust.
Sample

Estimated variance in frailty

Whole sample
Females
Males
Blacks
Whites
Hispanics

0.0050
0.0045
0.0050
0.0048
0.0043
0.0044

Table 6.1.1: Estimated variance in frailty

24

6.2

Comparison with Stepwise Methods: Evaluation of the Risk
Factors and Predictive Performance

Table 6.2.1 reports the performances BMA and stepwise model selection method in evaluating
the risk factors using one of the completed data sets for Hispanics for comparison. With the
stepwise method, it is not obvious how to obtain the P -values when the completed data sets
result in different models. Hence, only one of the completed data sets is used to demonstrate
the differences between the two approaches. Hispanics are chosen since, as reported in the
previous section, Hispanic sample is one of the samples for which BMA analysis indicates
indecisiveness for many variables.
For percent recidivists in the jurisdiction, employment history, drug abuse history, prior
felony convictions, age, type of crime committed and supervision level, P -values and posterior probabilities agree in saying that there is strong evidence for an effect. For the remaining
variables chosen by the stepwise method, however, two approaches lead to qualitatively different conclusions. For sex and percent owner-occupied housing in the jurisdiction, posterior
probabilities indicate weak evidence for an effect, but the P -values would lead to the effect
being “highly significant” (P < 0.01). For female-headed households and mean rearrest time
among recidivists in the jurisdiction, posterior probabilities indicate (weak) evidence against
an effect. However, the P -values again overstate the evidence for an effect, leading the effect
being called “highly significant” for mean rearrest time and “significant” (P < 0.05) for
percent female-headed households. Furthermore, for percent persons with 12 years or more
schooling and percent persons below poverty level in the jurisdiction, posterior probabilities indicate against evidence. The P -values on the other hand, would lead to the effect
being called “significant” for percent persons with 12 years or more schooling and “highly
significant” for percent persons below poverty level.
Variable
Sex
Employment history
Drug abuse history
Prior felony convictions
Age
Type of crime committed
Supervision level
Percent female-headed households
Percent persons with 12 or more years of schooling
Percent persons below poverty level
Percent owner-occupied housing
Mean rearrest time
Percent Recidivists

P-value

P(θ 6= 0)

0.0092
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0277
0.0161
0.0099
0.0000
0.0030
0.0000

59.4
98.2
100
100
100
100
100
25.2
0.5
4
54.3
29.9
100

Table 6.2.1: P-values for the stepwise chosen model and the corresponding posterior probabilities
with BMA for one of the completed data sets for Blacks

Next, I test the predictive performance of BMA procedure using one of the completed
samples for Blacks. Black sample is chosen as it is another sample for which BMA analysis
indicate indecisiveness for many variables. First, the sample is randomly split into two
such that an equal number of events (1020 rearrests) occurred in each. Then, the results
from the BMA analysis are compared with those from a single model selected by a stepwise
procedure and the model with the highest posterior probability. This is repeated for ten
25

random splits of the sample. The PPS for the competing methods and their standard
deviations across different splits are shown in Table 6.2.2; a higher score (less negative)
indicates better predictive performance. The difference in PPS of 100.83 can be viewed as
an increase in predictive performance per event by a factor of exp(100.83/1020)=1.1039 or
by about 10.39%. This means that BMA predicts who is at risk for recidivism 10.39% more
effectively than a method which picks the model with the best posterior model probability
and 4.88% more effectively than a stepwise method.
Method
Top Model
Stepwise
BMA

PPS
-6914.33 (28.91)
-6862.14 (27.06)
-6813.50 (22.30)

Table 6.2.2: PPSs for the model with the highest posterior probability, the stepwise chosen model
and BMA

7

Conclusions

Using a national sample, this paper has identified the potential risk factors for recidivism
among Female, Male, Black, White and Hispanic felony probationers. Social interactions
are embedded in a Cox proportional hazard model to model recidivism. To cope with
model uncertainty, Bayesian model averaging is used for the selection of covariates and the
subsequent inference. To check for unobserved neighborhood-level heterogeneity, a frailty
parameter is introduced into the model. The empirical results remain robust under frailty
thus indicating no significant overdispersion.
The empirical analysis in this study point to social interactions as one of the most significant contributor to recidivism among all gender, ethnicity and race groups. A separate
analysis of recidivism for each gender, race and ethnicity group proves to be fruitful. Though,
each group shares some common risk factors, there are also important differences. Among
other significant factors are: being male, being young, lack of employment, having a drug
abuse history and prior felony convictions, and living in neighborhoods with high serious
violent crime per capita for Blacks; being male, being young, lack of employment, having a
drug abuse history and prior felony convictions, being convicted of a property offense, robbery or drug trafficking, and living in Republican neighborhoods for Whites; being young,
lack of employment, having a drug abuse history and being convicted of a property offense,
robbery or drug trafficking for Hispanics; lack of employment, having prior felony convictions
and being under stringent supervision during probation for Females; being young, lack of
employment and education, having a drug abuse history and prior felony convictions, and
living in neighborhoods with low percentages of persons below poverty level for Males.
The evidence from the data is inconclusive as to the effects of some variables on recidivism. Among these are: probation term, ethnicity and age for Females; percent Republican
votes cast for the president in the jurisdiction for Males; prior felony convictions, and percent
persons with 4 or more years of college and the mean rearrest time among recidivists in the
jurisdiction for Hispanics; percent Hispanic population in the jurisdiction for Whites; and
marital status, education and probation term for Blacks. This does not necessarily mean,
26

however, that these variables could be safely neglected in any future work. In fact, they
should be included in any prediction with weights proportional to their posterior probabilities.
Methodologically, Bayesian model averaging is shown to lead to a better evaluation of
the risk factors, as well as improved risk assessment for potential recidivists compared to
traditional analysis which typically identifies risk factors using stepwise methods.

References
[1] Amemiya, T. (1985). Advanced Econometrics. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[2] Becker, G. A. (1971). The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[3] Benedict, W. R., and L. Huff-Corzine (1997). Return to the Scene of Punishment: Recidivism of Adult
Male Property Offenders on Felony Probation, 1986-1989. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency
34 (2), 237-252.
[4] Berger, J. O. and M. Delampady (1987). Testing Precise Hypotheses. Statistical Science 2, 317-352.
[5] Breslow, N. (1975). Analysis of Survival Data under the Proportional Hazards Model. International
Statistical Review 43, 45-48.
[6] Brock, W. and S. Durlauf (2001a). Interactions-based Models. In J. J. Heckman and E. Leamer (Eds.),
Handbook of Econometrics, Elsevier Science. Vol.5, Ch.54, p.3297-3380.
[7] Brock, W. and S. Durlauf (2001b). Discrete Choice with Social Interactions. The Review of Economic
Studies 68 (2), 235-260.
[8] Caldwell, M. G. (1951). Review of a New Type of Probation Study Made in Alabama. Federal Probation
15, 3-11.
[9] Chatfield, C. (1995). Model Uncertainty, Data mining, and Statistical Inference (with discussion). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A 158, 419-466.
[10] Clarke, S. H., Y. W. Lin, and W. L. Wallace (1988). Probationer Recidivism in North Carolina: Measurement and Classification of Risk. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, Institute of Government.
[11] Cox, D. R. (1972). Regression Models and Life Tables. Journal of the Royal Statistics Society. Series B
34: 187-202.
[12] Draper, D. (1995). Assessment and Propagation of Model Uncertainty. Journal of the Royal Statistics
Society. Series B 57, 45-97.
[13] Efroymson, M. (1960). Multiple Regression Analysis. In A. Ralston and H. Wilf (Eds.), Mathematical
Methods for Digital Computers. New York: Wiley.
[14] England, R. W. (1955). A Study of Postprobation Recidivism among Five Hundred Federal Offenders.
Federal Probation 19, 10-16.
[15] Freeman. S., J. Grogger and J. Sonstelie (1996). The Spatial Concentration of Crime. Journal of Urban
Economics 40 (2), 216-31.
[16] Furnival, G. M. and R. W. Wilson (1974). Regression by Leaps and Bounds. Technometrics 16, 499-511.
[17] Glaeser, D.L., B. Sacerdote and J.A. Scheinkman (1996). Crime and Social Interactions. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 445, 507-548.
[18] Good, I. J. (1952). Rational decisions. Journal of the Royal Statistics Society. Series B 14, 107-114.

27

[19] Guo, G. and G. Rodriguez, (1992). Estimating a Multivariate Proportional Hazards Model for Clustered
Data Using the EM Algorithm, With an Application to Child Survival in Guatemala. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 87, 969-976.
[20] Heckman J. and B. Singer, (1984). A Method for Minimizing the Distributional Assumptions in Econometric Models for Duration Data. Econometrica 52, 271-320.
[21] Honaker, J., A. Joseph, G. King, and K. Scheve (2001). A Program for Missing Data (Gauss Version).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University, http://GKing.Harvard.edu/.
[22] Irish, J. E. (1989). Probation and Recidivism: A Study of Probation Adjustment and Its Relationship
to Post-Probation Outcome for Adult Criminal Offenders. Mineola, NY: Nassau County Probation
Department.
[23] Kass, R. E. and A. E. Raftery (1995). Bayes factors. Journal of the American Statistical Association
90, 773-795.
[24] King, G., J. Honaker, A. Joseph, and K. Scheve (2001). Analyzing Incomplete Political Science Data:
An Alternative Algorithm for Multiple Impuation. American Political Science Review 95(1), 49-69.
[25] Kuk, A. Y. C. (1984). All Subsets Regression in a Proportional Hazards Model. Biometrika 71, 587-592.
[26] LaFree, G. D. (1985). Official Reactions to Hispanic Defendants in the Southwest. Journal of Research
in Crime and Delinquency 22, 213-37.
[27] Landis, J. R., J. K. Mercer, and C. E. Wolff (1969). Success and Failure of Adult Probationers in
California. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 6,34-40.
[28] Lawless, J. and K. Singhal (1978). Efficient Screening of Nonnormal Regression Models. Biometrics 34,
318-327.
[29] Madigan, D. and A. E. Raftery (1994). Model Selection and Accounting for Model Uncertainty in
Graphical Models using Occam’s Window. Journal of the American Statistical Association 89, 15351546.
[30] Madigan, D., S. A. Andersson, M. Perlman, and C. T. Volinsky (1996). Bayesian Model Averaging and
Model Selection for Markov Equivalence Classes of Acyclic Digraphs. Communications in Statistics,
Theory and Methods 25, 2493-2520.
[31] Maltz, M. D. (1984). Recidivism. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
[32] Mandel, J. (1979). Hispanics in the Criminal Justice System-The Nonexistent Problem. Law and Justice
3, 16-20.
[33] Manski, C. (1995). Identification Problems in Social Sciences. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[34] McGaha, J., M. Fichter, and P. Hirschburg (1987). Felony Probation: A Re-examination of Public Risk.
American Journal of Criminal Justice 11, 1-9.
[35] Meyer, B. D., (1990). Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells. Econometrica 58, 757-782.
[36] Petersilia, J. (1985). Probation and Felony Offenders. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.
[37] Petersilia, J., S. Turner, J.Kahan, J. Peterson (1985). Exexutive Summary of Rand’s Study, “Granting
Felons Probation: Public Risks and Alternatives”. Crime and Delinquency 31, 379-392.
[38] Petersilia, J. and S. Turner (1990). Comparing Intensive and Regular Supervision for High-Risk Probationers: Early Results from an Experiment in California. Crime and Delinquency 36, 87-111.
[39] Pritchard, D. A. (1979). Stable Predictors of Recidivism: A Summary. Criminology 17, 15-21.
[40] Raftery, A. E., D. Madigan, and J. Hoeting (1993). Model Selection and Accounting for Model Uncertainty in Linear Regression Models. Technical Report 262, University of Washington, Seattle.

28

[41] Raftery, A. E., D. Madigan, and J. Hoeting (1997). Bayesian Model Averaging for Linear Regression
Models. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92, 179-191.
[42] Raftery, A. E. (1996). Approximate Bayes Factors and Accounting for Model Uncertainty in Generalised
Linear Models. Biometrika 83, 251-266.
[43] Rubin, D.B. (1987). Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. J. Wiley & Sons, New York.
[44] Sah, R. (1991). Social Osmosis and Patterns of Crime. Journal of Political Economy, 99, 1272-1295.
[45] Shinnar, R. and S. Shinnar (1975). The Effects of the Criminal Justice System on the Control of Crime:
A Quantitative Approach. Law and Society Review 9, 581-611.
[46] Unnever, J. D. (1981). Institutional Racism: Direct and Structural Discrimination. Presented at the
76th Annual Meeting of the American Sociological Association, Toronto, Ontario.
[47] Therneau, T. M., P. M. Grambsch and V. S. Pankratz, (2000). Penalized Survival Models and Frailty.
Technical Report 66, Department of Health Science Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
[48] Visher, C. A., P. K. Lattimore, and R. L. Linster (1991). Predicting the Recidivism of Serious Youthful
Offenders Using Survival Models. Criminology 29, 329-66.
[49] Vito, G. F. (1986). Felony Probation and Recidivism: Replication and Response. Federal Probation 50,
17-25.
[50] Volinsky, C. (1997). Bayesian Model Averaging for Censored Survival Models. University of Washington
Statistics Department Ph.D. Dissertation.
[51] Volinsky, C. T., D. Madigan, A. E. Raftery, and R. A. Kronmal (1997). Bayesian Model Avereging in
Proportional Hazard Models: Assessing the Risk of a Stroke. Applied Statistics 46, 433-448.
[52] Whitehead, J. T. (1991). The Effectiveness of Felony Probation: Results from an Eastern State. Justice
Quarterly 8, 525-43.

29

Appendix: The following table displays 1) (in bold) the posterior probabilities that the
coefficients are non-zero and their standard deviations (in parenthesis) across completed data
sets; 2) the posterior parameter estimates and standard deviations (in parentheses)

Whole Sample
Sex
Male
Female
Employment
history
Under 40%
40%-60%
60% or more
Marital status
Married/Widower
Divorced/Separated
Single
Education
Grade school
Some high school
High school (GED)
Some college
College
Drug abuse
history
No abuse
Occasional abuse
Frequent abuse
Prior felony
convictions
None
One
Two or more
Age
Under 20
20-24 years old
25-29 years old
30-39 years old
40-49 years old
50 and older
Race
White
Black
Amer.Indian/
Pac. Islander
Asian/
Alaskan Native
Other
Type of crime
committed
Murder/nonneg
manslaughter
Rape
Robbery
Aggravated assault
Burglary
Larceny/auto theft
Drug trafficking
Other felony

Whites

Blacks

Hispanics

100 (0.00)

Males

Females

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

68.06 (25.99)

-0.482 (0.058)

-0.392 (0.078)

-0.601 (0.086)

-0.224 (0.198)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

99 (2.24)

93.56 (13.42)

-0.105 (0.046)
-0.328 (0.057)

-0.074 (0.054)
-0.323 (0.063)

-0.527 (0.201)
-0.456 (0.133)

-0.134 (0.079)
-0.367 (0.076)

-0.075 (0.083)
-0.274 (0.076)

-0.128 (0.098)
-0.331 (0.133)

4.26 (5.84)

7.34 (10.06)

0 (0.00)

0 (0.00)

23.88 (42.89)

0 (0.00)

-0.002 (0.014)
0.005 (0.025)

-0.004 (0.021)
0.009 (0.035)

0.000 (0.000)
0.000 (0.000)

0.000 (0.000)
0.000 (0.000)

-0.010 (0.051)
0.059 (0.133)

0.000 (0.000)
0.000 (0.000)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

0.44 (0.98)

60 (54.77)

20 (44.72)

0.00 (0.00)

0.057 (0.066)
-0.086 (0.076)
-0.188 (0.076)
-0.301 (0.148)

0.075 (0.069)
-0.074 (0.078)
-0.163 (0.080)
-0.236 (0.156)

-0.000
-0.001
-0.002
-0.003

-0.010
-0.084
-0.157
-0.313

0.037 (0.103)
0.004 (0.052)
-0.036 (0.106)
0.009 (0.085)

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

65.80 (47.70)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

0.096 (0.049)
0.335 (0.044)

0.085 (0.050)
0.328 (0.042)

0.145 (0.205)
0.294 (0.289)

0.146 (0.078)
0.394 (0.074)

0.072 (0.061)
0.315 (0.077)

0.135 (0.086)
0.453 (0.100)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

49.78 (46.01)

0.275 (0.047)
0.346 (0.056)

0.262 (0.049)
0.322 (0.054)

0.415 (0.140)
0.591 (0.205)

0.256 (0.072)
0.420 (0.068)

0.285 (0.073)
0.248 (0.083)

0.143 (0.184)
0.159 (0.203)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

19.56 (43.74)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

-0.046
-0.012
-0.074
-0.143
-0.238

-0.245
-0.260
-0.385
-0.665
-1.263

-0.298
-0.501
-0.696
-1.095
-1.321

-0.252
-0.299
-0.428
-0.637
-1.191

-0.251
-0.352
-0.501
-0.823
-1.331

(0.049)
(0.052)
(0.062)
(0.083)
(0.134)

-0.254
-0.384
-0.520
-0.850
-1.364

(0.050)
(0.055)
(0.068)
(0.090)
(0.139)

(0.013)
(0.022)
(0.034)
(0.058)

(0.141)
(0.090)
(0.201)
(0.374)
(0.622)

(0.080)
(0.118)
(0.175)
(0.363)

(0.070)
(0.079)
(0.078)
(0.124)
(0.193)

(0.076)
(0.092)
(0.129)
(0.150)
(0.209)

(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)

(0.104)
(0.112)
(0.118)
(0.170)
(0.329)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

0 (0.00)

0 (0.00)

0.495 (0.039)

0.520 (0.042)

0.000 (0.000)

0.000 (0.000)

0.119 (0.161)

0.135 (0.179)

0.000 (0.000)

0.000 (0.000)

-0.114 (0.130)
0.096 (0.172)

-0.126 (0.136)
0.118 (0.176)

0.000 (0.000)
0.000 (0.000)

0.000 (0.000)
0.000 (0.000)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

-0.246 (0.178)
0.568 (0.168)
0.267 (0.169)
0.674 (0.166)
0.621 (0.166)
0.475 (0.166)
0.553 (0.164)

-0.338 (0.194)
0.452 (0.185)
0.181 (0.188)
0.572 (0.184)
0.553 (0.184)
0.394 (0.183)
0.468 (0.182)

-0.297 (0.808)
1.487 (0.421)
0.788 (0.417)
1.418 (0.443)
0.951 (0.423)
0.819 (0.442)
1.047 (0.418)

0.080
0.901
0.683
1.124
1.004
0.774
1.000

-0.347 (0.263)
0.406 (0.251)
0.140 (0.247)
0.464 (0.248)
0.524 (0.245)
0.389 (0.235)
0.365 (0.245)

0.066
1.024
0.740
1.137
0.844
0.879
1.027

1

(0.292)
(0.283)
(0.287)
(0.280)
(0.278)
(0.278)
(0.278)

(0.436)
(0.437)
(0.423)
(0.431)
(0.425)
(0.418)
(0.417)

(Table continued)
Whole Sample

Males

Females

Whites

Blacks

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

32.30 (31.50)

100 (0.00)

0.36 (0.80)

-0.207 (0.046)

-0.196 (0.049)

-0.100 (0.176)

-0.296 (0.069)

-0.001 (0.013)

93.84 (7.96)
-0.003 (0.001)

82.26 (12.87)
-0.002 (0.001)

15.56 (7.16)
-0.001 (0.002)

71.10 (11.14)
-0.002 (0.002)

19.90 (13.68)
-0.001 (0.001)

12.88 (11.89)
-0.000 (0.001)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

100 (0.00)

-0.197 (0.088)
0.161 (0.065)
0.540 (0.074)
0.586 (0.091)

-0.195 (0.083)
0.147 (0.069)
0.521 (0.078)
0.556 (0.095)

-0.277 (0.249)
0.259 (0.195)
0.692 (0.205)
1.002 (0.235)

-0.233 (0.117)
0.132 (0.083)
0.602 (0.096)
0.652 (0.117)

-0.176 (0.136)
0.192 (0.124)
0.460 (0.125)
0.529 (0.148)

-0.215 (0.163)
0.145 (0.137)
0.443 (0.155)
0.583 (0.141)

% Non-White

0.34 (0.76)
0.000 (0.000)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

0.80 (1.79)
0.000 (0.001)

0.52 (1.16)
-0.000 (0.001)

5.76 (6.32)
0.000 (0.002)

14.32 (23.22)
-0.002 (0.005)

% Hispanic

100 (0.00)
0.006 (0.001)

100 (0.00)
0.006 (0.001)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

28.32 (28.40)
0.002 (0.003)

66.18 (26.37)
0.004 (0.004)

0.80 (1.10)
0.000 (0.000)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

0.42 (0.94)
-0.000 (0.001)

8.64 (11.83)
-0.001 (0.006)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

8.86 (6.17)
-0.001 (0.003)

7.64 (10.82)
-0.001 (0.005)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

3.64 (3.76)
0.000 (0.003)

1.72 (2.55)
-0.000 (0.003)

4.60 (10.29)
0.001 (0.004)

0.70 (0.97)
0.000 (0.001)

1.88 (1.67)
0.000 (0.002)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

9.20 (14.94)
0.002 (0.007)

1.02 (1.45)
0.000 (0.001)

6.14 (2.34)
0.001 (0.003)

38.92 (31.10)
0.006 (0.010)

100 (0.00)
-0.024 (0.005)

96.36 (3.76)
-0.022 (0.007)

8.78 (9.67)
-0.002 (0.007)

95.36 (10.38)
-0.020 (0.007)

56.38 (32.07)
-0.012 (0.013)

8.82 (13.03)
-0.002 (0.009)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

0.90 (1.34)
0.000 (0.001)

0.66 (1.13)
0.000 (0.000)

0.46 (1.03)
0.000 (0.000)

0.90 (1.29)
-0.000 (0.001)

81.54 (23.58)
0.013 (0.008)

6.14 (5.42)
0.002 (0.009)

0.54 (1.21)
0.000 (0.002)

0.42 (0.94)
0.000 (0.004)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

3.54 (3.73)
0.002 (0.011)

0.40 (0.89)
-0.000 (0.004)

34.82 (9.07)
0.002 (0.003)

35.340 (9.58)
0.002 (0.003)

0.62 (1.00)
0.000 (0.000)

81.58 (28.38)
0.007 (0.005)

0.98 (1.03)
-0.000 (0.001)

0.98 (1.38)
0.000 (0.001)

40.66 (13.23)
-1.199 (1.612)

53 (13.03)
-1.816 (1.915)

1.24 (1.72)
-0.038 (0.544)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

98.92 (2.41)
-6.534 (1.897)

9.84 (7.95)
0.518 (1.814)

% Property taxes

3.20 (1.46)
-0.000 (0.001)

1.18 (1.62)
-0.000 (0.000)

0.88 (1.21)
-0.000 (0.000)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

1.08 (1.48)
-0.000 (0.000)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

Log population

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

1.20 (1.68)
-0.001 (0.010)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

9.50 (9.96)
0.008 (0.029)

0 (0.00)
0.000 (0.000)

98.54 (1.58)
-0.000 (0.000)

100 (0.00)
-0.000 (0.000)

0.90 (1.37)
0.000 (0.000)

0.94 (1.30)
0.000 (0.000)

100 (0.00)
-0.001 (0.000)

46.62 (32.34)
-0.000 (0.000)

100 (0.00)
0.030 (0.002)

100 (0.00)
0.030 (0.002)

100 (0.00)
0.031 (0.006)

100 (0.00)
0.035 (0.003)

100 (0.00)
0.027 (0.004)

100 (0.00)
0.035 (0.007)

Ethnicity
Hispanic
Non-hispanic
Probation
term
Supervision
Administrative
Minimum
Medium
Maximum
Intense

% Female
headed
households
% w/ ≥ 12
years of school
% w/ ≥ 4
years of college
% Below
poverty level
% Owner
occupied
housing
Unemployment
rate
% Republican
Violent serious
crime per capita

Mean rearrest
time
% Recidivists

Hispanics

Table A.1: Posterior probabilities and their standard deviations, and posterior parameter
estimates and standard deviations

2

