Commerce and Democracy¤
Mohan Penubarti

Michael D. Ward

Department of Political Science
UCLA

Department of Political Science

Working Paper no. 6
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
University of Washington
March 9, 2000 version 1.0¯

Abstract: In this study, we explore the relationship between democracy and international trade and demonstrate that the link is weak. We base our analysis on a general
equilibrium model of international trade as well as on corrected, symmetric measures
of bilateral trade °ows. Further, we also incorporate spatial dependence among the
observations. We argue that previous studies which show that democratic countries
are more likely to trade with each other rely on a misspeci¯cation of the trade model.
Once this misspeci¯cation is corrected, democracy is no longer a signi¯cant direct
in°uence on bilateral trade °ows.
Key Words: international trade, democracy, spatial analysis.

¤

Paper prepared for the conference \The Development and Application of Spatial Analysis for
Political Methodology," University of Colorado, Boulder, 10{12 March 2000. We thank Keith Maskus
and Harvey Starr for insightful comments on this version of the paper, which we hope to utilize in
our future work.

Les vertus se perdent dans l'int¶er^et comme les °euves se perdent dans
la mer. Francis, Duc de La Rochefoucauld, Maximes, 1665.

1

Introduction

Political scientists have long argued that policy preferences of relevant political agents
are re°ected in a country's trade policy (Rogowski 1989; Frieden 1991). These preference are ¯ltered through political institutions which both condition the incentives
facing domestic political agents and as well as aggregate these preferences to determine policy (Garrett 1995). Therefore, the nature of the political regime is an
important determinant of a country's trade regime. For instance, the strength of various actors in the economy, electoral rules, and the independence of the state di®er
in signi¯cant ways in a democracy and a non-democracy. Therefore, the degree of
democracy could be an important determinant of international trade policy.
In this study, we explore the relationship between democracy and international
trade and demonstrate that the link is weak. We base our analysis on a general
equilibrium model of international trade as well as on corrected, symmetric measures
of bilateral trade °ows. Further, we also incorporate spatial dependence among the
observations. We argue that previous studies which show that democratic countries
are more likely to trade with each other rely on a misspeci¯cation of the trade model.
Once this misspeci¯cation is corrected, democracy is no longer a signi¯cant direct
in°uence on bilateral trade °ows.

2

Democracy and international trade

In a recent study, developing upon the now widely accepted link between peace and
democracy, Bliss and Russett (1998) argue that a shared polity leads to greater trade
between democracies in one of two broad ways: (1) a democratic trading state will feel
less threatened that its security will be threatened by trading with another democracy than an autocracy; and (2) private actors in democratic states might prefer
trading with those in other democratic states since their international business might
be less disrupted due to military con°ict. In addition, the rule of law and shared
norms among democracies might provide insurance against expropriations and facilitate business transactions (Bliss and Russett 1998). They test their hypothesis with
annual regressions from 1962{89 and ¯nd broad support that bilateral trade increases
as the least democratic of the two trading partners becomes more democratic.
In another line of reasoning, Mans¯eld, Milner and Rosendor® (1997; 1998) have
argued that political regime types of countries are an important factor in international economic cooperation. In all countries, governments are subject to domestic
pressures in developing trade policy. In democracies, especially, voters exert control over political leaders who have to face competitive elections. In addition, in all
1

countries, governments must satisfy in°uential domestic groups who contribute to the
power base (as in autocracies) or political campaigns (as in democracies). However,
the interests of these two groups are di®erent and hence governments face a trade o®.
Consumers (i.e., voters) have a reason to prefer trade liberalization as it increases the
consumer surplus. On the other hand, domestic interest groups may be interested in
trade barriers to increase the producer surplus. The degree of trade barriers that a
government keeps depends on the relative in°uence of each of these groups. Therefore, reduction of trade barriers lowers the chance of interest group support while
increasing the chance of support from voters.
Since political leaders in autocracies do not compete in elections, they place no
weight on winning elections. However, political leaders in democracies place a great
deal of weight on winning elections, hence the weight attached to voter in°uence is
larger than that given to special interests. Mans¯eld, Milner and Rosendor® (1998)
model the trade interactions between countries as a repeated Prisoners' Dilemma
game and show that two democracies are more likely to get into liberalizing trade
agreements than mixed (democracy and autocracy) countries. Mixed countries, in
turn, tend to engage in more liberalizing trade agreements than two autocracies.
They test their hypotheses with data on preferential trading arrangements (PTAs)
from 1960 to 1990 and ¯nd strong support for their model.
Morrow, Siverson and Tabares (1998) also explore the link between international
trade and democracy and ¯nd a strong signi¯cant relationship between the two. However, all of these studies have a number of drawbacks. First, all of them use an ad
hoc model of international trade in which bilateral trade °ows are regressed against a
number of political and economic variables within the context of a loose ¯tting gravity model. Others with similar speci¯cations have come to the opposite conclusion
on the link between trade and democracy (Barbieri and Schneider 1999). A second
problem with all these studies is that they fail to take into account the spatial context
of international trade °ows, a failure which leads standard statistical techniques to
give both biased and inconsistent results. Third, we use a better measure of international trade °ows from the recently available World Trade Database from Statistics
Canada which provides symmetric measures of trade °ows. With these improvements
on the existing work in the literature, we test the putative link between democracy
and international trade.

3
3.1

Determinants of international trade °ows
Factor endowments, scale economies

In order to test the link between democracy and international trade, we need a °exible
model of bilateral trade °ows. Conventional international trade theory attempts to explain bilateral trade in terms of relative di®erences among factor endowments of countries. Consequently, the volume of trade between two countries is usually inversely
2

proportional to the similarity of endowments. However, due to scale economies, a signi¯cant portion of bilateral trade | especially among industrialized countries | also
takes place among countries with similar relative factor endowments. Scale economies
may lead countries to specialize and trade with one another even in the absence of
any di®erence in relative factor endowments. The monopolistic competition model
proposed by Helpman and Krugman (1985) provides a °exible way to represent bilateral trade °ows within a general equilibrium framework. In this model, bilateral
imports are proportional to the exporting country's industry outputs where the factor
of proportionality is the importing country's share of the world expenditure.
The monopolistic competition model is a description of bilateral trade °ows under
the assumption that there is no trade friction in the °ow of goods and services (i.e., it
is a model of free trade). The existence of policy, political, and other distortions will
enhance or diminish the volume of trade between two countries. Since the main use
of the model in this study is to examine the e®ect of democracy and other political
and policy variables on bilateral trade °ows, we can incorporate these types of factors
directly into the monopolistic competition model. In addition to the regime characteristics of the trading partners (as measured by level of democracy), we consider
two other types of distortions: (1) policy distortions such as trade barriers; and (2)
political distortions such as interstate con°ict, security arrangement, and similarity
of interests. Consider each of these in turn.

3.2

Trade barriers

One of the most explicit forms of policy distortion to bilateral °ows is trade barriers.
Trade barriers range from visible restrictions such as tari®s and quotas to the less
visible such as non{tari® barriers via industrial and procurement policies and enforcement. The e®ect of tari®s on imports has received wide attention in the international
trade literature and in international trade policy.1 The General Agreement on Tari®s and Trade (GATT) has provided the institutional basis for trade negotiations in
the post World War II era. Successive rounds of GATT negotiations have led to a
substantial decline in tari® barriers and a signi¯cant increase in merchandise trade
among major industrial and industrializing economies. The last round of negotiations, the Uruguay Round, has led to further reductions in barriers in both developed
and developing economies in the late 1990s. Also, as many developing countries
undertook economic liberalization programmes in the 1990s, they have signi¯cantly
reduced trade barriers. Given these reductions, one would expect that tari® barriers
play a decreasing role in determining bilateral trade °ows. However, the successful
reduction in tari® barriers seems to have given rise to non{tari® barriers, especially
among developed countries. Since the principal aim of these barriers is to reduce
imports to protect domestic producer groups or import competing sectors, we would
1

Leamer (1992) surveys a number of measures of tari® barriers and their e®ects on international
trade.

3

expect the link between trade °ows and trade barriers to be negative.

3.3

Cooperation and con°ict

The political relations between states can also in°uence their bilateral trade °ows
in a number of ways. The simplest mechanism is through direct trade policy: when
two countries are in direct military con°ict with each other, they are likely to cuto® trade or impose economic sanctions. Examples would include U.S. trade policy
towards Iraq, Iran, or Cuba. The work of Brian Pollins (1989b; 1989a) identi¯es a
more microeconomic mechanism between con°ict and trade. Pollins argues that importers take into account not only the price and quantity of goods and services in
their purchase decisions but also the place of origin of the products and the political
relationship between the importing and exporting countries.2 They do so to minimize disruption to supply. In a market where the suppliers are from both friendly
and hostile nations, the risk factor might tilt commerce in favor of the suppliers in the
friendly nation by an appreciable amount. Consequently, the level of trade between
two countries will decline as their relations become more con°ictual. Pollins empirically tests this hypothesis by incorporating a measure of net cooperation between
two countries into a simple gross imports equation for six countries. He ¯nds that
relative cooperativeness or hostility does a®ect trade °ows between trading partners
and concludes that trade does indeed `follow the °ag'.
In a similar vein, Dixon, Muller and Seligson (1993) argue that countries with
similar interests have higher levels of trade than those with dissimilar interests due
to di®erences in risk premia to ¯rms engaged in international trade. Dixon, Muller
and Seligson (1993) test this hypothesis on U.S. trade and show that trade is higher
with countries which have a similar voting pattern in the United Nations (proxy for
similarity of interests). Morrow, Siverson and Tabares (1998) also include both these
direct and indirect e®ects of con°ict on bilateral trade °ows and ¯nd that the indirect
e®ects are positive and signi¯cant while the direct e®ect of con°ict is not statistically
signi¯cant.

3.4

Alliances

A di®erent political relationship between trading partners is explored by Gowa and
Mans¯eld (1993). Gowa and Mans¯eld argue that the existence of a formal alliance
between the importing and exporting nations will lead to fewer trade barriers and
thus to an increase in trade. Moreover, they argue that this e®ect is distinct from the
normal cooperation and con°ict between two nations in that a considerable degree
of low{level con°ict is often present among members of an alliance and substantial
cooperation does exist among states that are not allied. The basis for their argument
is that trade produces security externalities in the form of increased e±ciency with
2

For earlier work on this issue, see Polachek (1980) and Gasiorowski and Polachek (1982).

4

which domestic resources can be employed. The increased e±ciency allows a state to
make more resources available for military uses (Hirschman 1980; Srinivasan 1987).
Thus, trade produces security externalities by enhancing the potential military power
of the trading partners.
Gowa and Mans¯eld argue that, given the anarchic nature of the international
system and the lack of a supranational authority, states are forced to consider the
potential military power of both allies and adversaries in their security calculations.
Given the security externalities of international trade, trading with an ally produces a
positive externality as the increase in e±ciency with which resources are allocated in
both states increase the resources available for their military forces. Similarly, trade
with an adversary produces a negative externality. These externalities thus lead to
a divergence between the private and social costs to trade. As a result, a socially
sub{optimal level of trade could take place and government intervention in trade can
be welfare{enhancing. Thus, Gowa and Mans¯eld argue that tari® barriers should be
lower among allies than among adversaries. They empirically test this hypothesis by
augmenting a general gravity equation of imports with variables to capture alliance
e®ects. From their analysis of seven countries over an eighty year period from 1905 to
1985, they conclude that \alliances exert a direct, statistically signi¯cant, and large
e®ect on bilateral trade °ows."3

3.5

Similarity of Interests

Signorino and Ritter developed a spatial (in the voting sense, not in the geographic
sense) measure of foreign policy similarity. They assume that a state makes choices
over a a variety of policy dimensions, and that these choices reveal their foreign policy
portfolio. The closer two states are in the policy space, the more similar their revealed
policy positions. Conversely, states further apart in the policy space have dissimilar
revealed policy positions. By calculating the distance between the alliance portfolios
of pairs of countries, and weighting it by a distance metric, Signorino and Ritter
de¯ne a new statistics, Si;j;t that gives a coherent measure of how broadly similar
are the foreign policy interests of two countries, as inferred from their portfolios of
alliance treaties.
This measure, S, has been proposed as one measure of the strategic political
interaction among countries at the international level. As such it has been promoted
as an in°uence on bilateral trade: states with broadly similiar foreign policies are
thought to have similar trade preferences. Morrow, Siverson and Tabares (1998)
utilize this measure in their model of international trade and show that it has a
strong linkage to bilateral commerce.
We turn now to the incorporation of these various elements into a model of bilateral trade.
3

Gowa and Mans¯eld (1993, p. 416).

5

4

Model speci¯cation and estimation

Based on the discussion so far, we can express the model in its general form as follows:
HK

Mij

Constraints

z}|{
z }| {
= M ( Qj ; Cij ; Ti
|{z}
| {z }
=1

i
j
Mij
Qj
Cij
Ti
Aij
Sij
Dij

:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:

<0

Accelerators

;

}|
{
z
Aij ; Sij ; Dij )
|
{z
}
>0

importing country
exporting country
weighted bilateral imports
exporter output ( ln -2.89,8.70)
political con°ict (0,1=yes)
trade barriers (ln -20.45,0.52)
security alliance (0,1=yes)
similarity of interests (-1.89,0)
democratic similarity (0,1=yes)

An important but generally ignored issue with the estimation of this model is the
spatial dependence among the di®erent observations. Trade, by construction, is a
process in which °ows between two countries are not independent of °ows between
those countries and other countries. Thus, the standard assumption of independence
of observations does not hold, as the bilateral pairs are not strictly speaking, exchangeable. Therefore, we need to take into account their spatial correlation along
similar lines to serial correlation in a time series framework. In fact, in the presence of
spatial dependence, OLS results are both biased and inconsistent. In the next section,
we describe the spatial autoregressive model which corrects both these drawbacks.

4.1

Spatial dependence

A mixed regressive spatial autoregressive model (SAR) is described by:
y = ½W s y + X¯ + ²
² = N (0; ¾ 2 In )

(1)
(2)

where y is an n£1 vector of the dependent variable, X is a n£k matrix of explanatory
variables and W s is a row standardized spatial contiguity matrix. ½ is the coe±cient
on the spatially lagged dependent variable W s y and ¯ is the set of coe±cients for the
explanatory variables in the model.
6

Incorporating these political and policy variables into the basic gross imports
equation from the Helpman{Krugman model, the speci¯c form of the augmented
model is then:
Helpman¡Krugman

Mij =

z }| {
¯ + ¯Q Qj

Spatial

Constraints
Accelerators
z
}|
{ z
}|
{ z }| {
+ ¯C Cij + ¯T Ti + ¯A Aij + ¯S Si + ¯D Dij + ½W S Mij

(3)

where each of the variables is expressed in natural logs and the error term is log{
normally distributed.
The maximum likelihood estimation for this model is developed by (Anselin 1988),
since an OLS estimation of the above equation will produce not only ine±cient, but
also biased estimates of the parameters. One drawback of this estimation method
is the assumption that the underlying disturbance process is normally distributed.
Strictly speaking the likelihood for such a model is very complicated, since it is
conditioned on known values for all cases in the consideration of each case. Standard
approaches involve two strong assumptions. First, it is assumed that the spatial
weight is known in advance. This distinguishes this approach from the autologistic
approach (vide Besag 1974). Second it is typically assumed that the lnjIn ¡ ½W s j
term is factored out of the likelihood via the method of Besag and Moran (1975).4
Anselin (1988) and LeSage (1999) discuss these ideas.
The conjugate combination of advances in Bayesian approaches to data analysis
(an excellent introduction to which is Gelman and Rubin 1996) and the development
of Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulation techniques for analysis of statistical problems (nicely summarized in Gilks, Richardson and Spiegelhalter 1996) has meant that
previously intractable or highly di±cult problems such as these can now be handled
in a di®erent, more e®ective manner. This is not the place to review the Bayesian or
MCMC approaches, but they provide a more e®ective way of handling large problems
such as those we are dealing with herein, where our contiguity matrix is on the order
of 100; 0002 . Indeed, MCMC approaches were developed to explicitly handle such
problems and are approximately equal to a spatial model.
Accordingly we will estimate our model using a classical SAR model, as well as
a Bayesian version of it that uses MCMC sampling to draw candidate parameter
vectors from a di®use set of conjugate priors in order to build up information about
the distributional characteristics of the estimated parameters. Before turning to these
results, we brie°y describe the data we employ.

4.2

Data

Bilateral trade data are from Statistics Canada World Trade Database. These data
are based on import and export data from the UN Statistical O±ce. These latter
4

However, computational resources have grown since 1975 and the inversion of relatively large
matrices within the optimization search is no longer impossible.

7

data su®er from a number of problems due to di®erences in reporting, treatment of
transport costs, commodity designations, valuations, and the due to the uncertainty
of sources of imports and destination of exports. Statistics Canada corrects for many
of these discrepancies and creates a single{valued array that is based on the four{digit
UN SITC Revision 2 classi¯cation (Feenstra, Lipsey and Bowen 1997). In this study,
we use the aggregated trade °ows for manufacturing from 1970{1995. Economic and
demographic data are from the World Bank World Development Indicators, 1998 .
These include output, aggregate expenditure data for weighting the imports, and a
measure of trade barriers (customs revenue as a share of imports). Distance data are
capital to capital distances in kilometers.
Turning to political variables, con°ict data are from the Militarized Interstate
Dispute dataset from Correlates of War Project at the University of Michigan. The
original MID measure covers any event involving the threat to use force or the actual
use of force on a scale of 1 to 5. We recode this scale as a binary variable indicating
the presence or absence of a militarized con°ict between two states (the dyad) in a
given year. Alliance data are also from the Correlates of War project. The original
COW measure codes di®erent levels of military alliance from 1 to 3 which we recode
here as a binary variable for the presence or absence of a security alliance. Finally,
the democracy measure is from a corrected version of POLITY III data (Jaggers
and Gurr 1994), also known as POLITY IV. Following standard practice, we code
as democracies countries that have a score of six or higher on the democracy scale
in POLITY III; accordingly, democratic similarity requires both countries to be democratic by this measure. The measure of similarity of interests is the S measure
developed by Signorino and Ritter (1999). S is a measure of policy portfolio similarity of two countries and is computed from the patterns of alliances from the Alliance
Data from the Correlates of War Project.

4.3

Estimation

Table 1 presents the SAR as well as Bayesian SAR estimates of parameters for equation 3 as speci¯ed above. This speci¯cation di®ers from that typically found in the
literature in that it not only includes a term for trade barriers, but it also includes
a spatial lag term. These estimated parameters are quite in line with the argument
presented above. First and perhaps foremost, the spatial parameter ½^ is signi¯cant
and relatively large.5
The theoretical expectation of ¯Q is unity and our estimate is close to 1:0. This
suggests that the equilibrium trade model is working as expected and broadly captures
the bilateral equilibrium trade values for typical country pairs. Having established
strong con¯dence in the underlying model, we now turn to interpreting our political
variables.
5

Because our matrix is approximately 100; 0002 and row standardized, scale e®ects mean that
0:01 is actually a pretty large e®ect when combined.

8

The estimated coe±cient for political con°ict is not plausibly di®erent from a prior
of 0:0. This result is quite di®erent from what is generally found in the literature,
though it is consistent with the ¯ndings in Morrow, Siverson and Tabares (1998; 1999).
Gleditsch (1999) also found only a weak link between con°ict and trade, one which was
stronger and more consistent for civil wars than for international wars and militarized
interstate disputes. There are several reasons why interstate military con°icts may
not in°uence bilateral trade °ows. In data based on annual observations, militarized
interstate disputes are coded as a 1 for the entire year no matter when they actually
occur during the year. Further, enduring con°icts are quite rare and therefore most
con°icts are short lived. On the other hand, trade data is measured at the end of the
year. So, unless a militarized interstate dispute occurs in the earlier part of the year,
one may not see its economic consequences re°ected in the trade data. Furthermore,
most trade °ows are based on longer term contracts and one would expect that the
short term military con°ict short of a complete embargo on trade should not e®ect
the risk pro¯les for traders.
Trade barriers, however, prove to be a strong inhibitor to bilateral trade, as expected. The coe±cient is relatively large (these are in log form) and have relatively
tiny standard errors, indicating a low level of uncertainty about these e®ects. This
e®ect has not been widely explored in quantitative studies of the political determinants of international trade °ows, but appears to be quite strong, much stronger than
the oft-studied con°ict{trade linkage.
Turning to the variables that capture the e®ect of alliance similarities and mutual
alliances, we ¯nd that both variables are quite strong and in the predicted direction.
Countries with mutual alliances, ceteris paribus, do appear to have larger volumes of
commercial activities with one another. At the same time, countries that have more
similar pro¯les of international preferences also have an independently higher level of
bilateral commerce. These ¯ndings conform in large part to what has been found in
the extant literature.
However, it does not appear to be the case that, given these in°uences, that high
levels of democracy in the trading partners appears to bear any independent causal
e®ect on the volume of bilateral trade. The estimate coe±cient is roughly equal to its
prior (0:0) with a substantial amount of uncertainty around that value. Conditional
on the other values in the model, democratic pairs of countries do not trade more
with one another than mixed or non-democratic pairs of countries. This ¯nding is
not consistent with most other empirical studies in the ¯eld.
It should be remembered that these ¯ndings must be interpreted in light of a
model that incorporates the nonexchangeability of observations, which are shown to
be important. Spatial dependencies in trade patterns must be taken into account in
such models, and when they are we see a fundamental reversal of some important
¯ndings in the literature.
Compare this with a more typical speci¯cation which does not include trade barriers, nor a spatial speci¯cation. In Table 2 we broadly replicate the empirical analysis
9

Dependent variable: Bilateral imports (Mij )
Estimated via:
Variable
Parameter SAR Bayesian SAR
Intercept
¯
-11.76
-11.73
(0.02)
(0.02)
Exporter Output
¯Q
1.04
1.05
(0.004)
(0.004)
Political Con°ict
¯C
-0.23
-0.41
(0.80)
(0.63)
Trade Barriers
¯T
-0.09
-0.07
(0.01)
(0.01)
Mutual Alliance
¯A
1.11
1.03
(0.02)
(0.02)
Similarity of Interests
¯S
1.31
1.09
(0.04)
(0.04)
Democratic Similarity
¯D
0.02
-0.02
(0.02)
(0.02)
Spatial lag
½
0.01
0.01
(0.002)
0.001
N =94,811
Table 1: A model of bilateral trade °ows.

10

Variable
Intercept

Dependent Variable: Bilateral imports (Mij )
Parameter OLS with Newey-West ¾
^
¯
-11.93
(0.023)

Exporter Output

¯Q

Political Con°ict

¯C

1.04
(0.005)

-0.12
(0.315)

Mutual Alliance

¯A

1.07
(0.032)

Similarity of Interests

¯S

1.32
(0.050)

Democratic Similarity

¯D

0.06
(0.021)

N = 94,811
Table 2: Replication of Morrow et al. (1999) results

found in Morrow, Siverson and Tabares (1999). We use a di®erent database, one
that has symmetric bilateral trade, and a di®erent model of trade, one that is an
equilibrium model of free trade (as opposed to a gravity model as found therein). In
Table 2 we seek to show that if you omit the spatial variable as well as the variable
that establishes the strong constraints on trade, tari® barriers, that the standard result that joint democracy increases trade emerges. These estimates basically replicate
the results found in the corrected estimates found in Morrow, Siverson and Tabares
(1999) in that political con°ict (i.e., MID) is not found to be a powerful predictor of
bilateral trade, but mutual alliances, similarity of interests, and democratic similarity
each are found to be associated with higher levels of bilateral commerce.6
This suggests that the ¯nding of trade-promoting democratic cultures may be
overstated and dependent on a speci¯cation that ignores the spatial heterogeneity of
bilateral trade as well as the strong impacts of tari® barriers on bilateral trade. Only
when we mis-specify the model by omitting these linkages does the democracy{trade
link emerge. What does this mean? In part it means that a full accounting of the
spatial e®ects is necessary to understand international trade models that have strong
spatial heterogeneity (against the assumption of most statistical models of the homogeneity of variance). It may also mean that trade barriers are simply a mechanism
through which countries can a®ect bilateral aggregate commerce. It may be that
democracies have fewer or lower barriers against other democracies, for example.
6

Another minor di®erence is that we use the Signorino and Ritter (1999) measure of similarity
of interests, while they use log ¿ .

11

5

Conclusion

What conclusion can we draw from these analyses? We have shown that theoretically
as well as empirically, bilateral trade °ows are not independent, but are interdependent. The implication of this is that statistical models which ignore this interdependence risk generating conclusions that are based on biased and ine±cient coe±cients.
Such coe±cients may lead to erroneous conclusions. Since the literature on trade and
con°ict almost universally ignores this conditionality, that literature may replicate
a variety of results that are consistently (though not e±ciently) biased. When disequilibrating forces are incorporated into a model of free trade that is estimated in a
way consistent with spatial heterogeneity, the links that many studies report between
bilateral con°ict and trade disappear and the linkages virtually all other studies have
uncovered between \joint democracy" and trade evaporate. By eliminating the spatial linkages and the trade barriers from our model, we are able to pretty faithfully
replicate the results found in recent, prominent work in this area (Morrow, Siverson
and Tabares 1999).
Thus we are led to several, short conclusions:
1. Bilateral trade °ows as well as bilateral con°ict patterns are not spatially homogeneous;
2. Empirical models that ignore this simple fact generate results that overstate
the general ability of con°ict to dampen trade;
3. There is little evidence of a liberal, democratic enhancement to bilateral trade,
once trade barriers and spatial heterogeneity are taken into account.
4. Repeated replication of variants of similar models that ignore spatial heterogeneity are likely to continue to produce fairly similar results, but there is a
high likelihood that these frequently replicated results actually point in the
wrong direction.
It may well be that democracy and peace enhance commerce at the aggregate
level. It may even be that zones of peace, democracy, and commerce evolve together.
But these gross statements require unpacking to determine what exactly is occuring,
for it is clear that they don't apply universally well at all points in time or space.
Undertaking this spatial and temporal disaggregation leaves us with more concrete
information about the actual mechanisms, if any, in force as well as additional information about the degree of uncertainty that provides a wide ¯ducial band on our
empirical assertions. In and of itself, international commerce is not \caused" by the
absence of con°ict nor by the presence of shared democratic institutions. As we make
our models more precise, our understandings of the constitutive components of bilateral trade may be embellished away from incorrect generalizations that are too
coarsely grained to be very informative in the ¯rst place.
12

References
Anselin, Luc. 1988. Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models. Dordrecht, The
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Barbieri, Katherine and Gerald Schneider. 1999. \Globalization and Peace: Assessing
New Directions in the Study of Trade and Con°ict." Journal of Peace Research
36(4):387{404.
Besag, Julian E. 1974. \Spatial Interaction and the Statistical Analysis of Lattice
Systems (with Discussion)." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B,
Methodological 36:192{225.
Besag, Julian E. and Patrick A. P. Moran. 1975. \On the Estimation and Testing of
Spatial Interaction in Gaussian Lattice Processes." Biometrika 62:555.
Bliss, Harry and Bruce Russett. 1998. \Democratic Trading Partners: The Liberal
Connection, 1962{1989." Working Paper.
Dixon, William J., Edward N. Muller and Mitchell A. Seligson. 1993. \Inequality and
Political Violence Revisited." American Political Science Review 87(4):983{993.
Feenstra, Robert C., Robert E. Lipsey and Harry P. Bowen. 1997. \World Trade
Flows, 1970{1992." NBER Working Paper 5910.
Frieden, Je®ry A. 1991. \Invested Interests: The Politics of National Economic Policies in a World of Global Finance." International Organization 45(4):425{451.
Garrett, Geo®rey. 1995. \Internationalization, Institutions, and Political Change."
International Organization 49(4):627+.
Gasiorowski, Mark and Solomon W. Polachek. 1982. \Con°ict and Interdependence:
East{West Trade Linkages in the Era of Detente." Journal of Con°ict Resolution
26:709{729.
Gelman, Andrew and Donald B. Rubin. 1996. \Markov Chain Monte Carlo Methods
in Biostatistics." Statistical Methods in Medical Research 5:339{355.
Gilks, W. R., S. Richardson and D.J. Spiegelhalter. 1996. Markov Chain Monte Carlo
in Practice. Boca Raton,LA: Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Gleditsch, Kristian S. 1999. Peace Has Its Victories, No Less Renowned Than War:
A Local Interaction Approach to Regional Con°ict, Integration, and Democratization PhD thesis University of Colorado Boulder, Colorado: .
Gowa, Joanne and Edward D. Mans¯eld. 1993. \Power Politics and International
Trade." American Political Science Review 87(2):408{420.
13

Helpman, Elhanan and Paul R. Krugman. 1985. Market Structure and Foreign
Trade: Increasing Returns, Imperfect Competition, and the International Economy. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Hirschman, Albert O. 1980. National Power and the Structure of Foreign Trade.
Berkeley, California: University of California Press.
Jaggers, Keith and Ted Robert Gurr. 1994. \Tracking Democracy's Third Wave with
Polity III Data." Journal of Peace Research 32:469{482.
Leamer, Edward. 1992. The Structure and E®ects of Tari® and Nontari® Barriers in
1983. In The Political Economy of International Trade, ed. Ronald Jones and
Anne Krueger. Basil Blackwell.
LeSage, James P. 1999.
Spatial Econometrics using MATLAB.
www.econ.utoledo.edu.

The Web:

Mans¯eld, Edward, Helen Milner and B. Peter Rosendor®. 1997. \Free to Trade:
Democracies, Autocracies and International Trade." Working Paper.
Mans¯eld, Edward, Helen Milner and B. Peter Rosendor®. 1998. \Why Democracies Cooperate More: Electoral Control and International Trade Agreements."
Working Paper.
Morrow, James D., Randolph M Siverson and Tressa E. Tabares. 1998. \The Political
Determinants of International Trade: The Major Powers, 1907{90." American
Political Science Review 92(3):649{661.
Morrow, James D., Randolph M Siverson and Tressa E. Tabares. 1999. \Correction to:
'The Political Determinants of International Trade'." American Political Science
Review 93(4):931{933.
Polachek, Solomon W. 1980. \Con°ict and Trade." Journal of Con°ict Resolution
24:55{78.
Pollins, Brian M. 1989a. \Con°ict, Cooperation, and Commerce: The E®ects of
International Political Interactions on Bilateral Trade Flows." American Journal
of Political Science 33:737{761.
Pollins, Brian M. 1989b. \Does Trade Still Follow The Flag?" American Political
Science Review 83(2):465{480.
Rogowski, Ronald. 1989. Commerce and Coalitions: How Trade A®ects Domestic
Political Alignments. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Signorino, Curtis and Je® Ritter. 1999. \Tau-b or Not Tau-b." International Studies
Quarterly 43(1):115{144.
14

Srinivasan, T. N. 1987. The National Defense Argument for Government Intervention in Foreign Trade. In U.S. Trade Policies in a Changing World Economy,
ed. Robert M. Stern. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Press.

15

