Strategies in naturalistic decision making

1

Strategies in Naturalistic Decision-Making:
A cognitive Task Analysis of Naval Weather Forecasting1
Susan Joslyn & David Jones
University of Washington, Seattle

Working Paper no. 62
Center for Statistics in the Social Sciences
University of Washington
July 7, 2006

1

Susan Joslyn, PhD. is a Senior Lecturer at the University of Washington, Department of Psychology, Box
351525, Seattle, WA 98195-1525. Phone: 206.616-7183/Fax: 206.616.4976. Email: susanj@u.washington.edu.
David Jones is a Senior Physicists at the University of Washington, Applied Physics Lab. This research was
supported by the DOD Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative (MURI) program administered by the Office
of Naval Research under Grant N00014-01-10745

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

2

ABSTRACT
The work reported here was undertaken to gain an understanding of the weather forecasting
process in a naturalistic setting that involves task switching and moderate time pressure. In the
first study, Navy weather forecasters verbalized their thoughts while they completed a standard
forecasting task. In the second study, Navy weather forecasters completed a questionnaire after
finishing each of 22 forecasts. The studies showed that military forecasting is streamlined;
forecasters relied largely on numerical weather prediction models, and problem solving was
predominantly rule-based rather than based upon a four-dimensional mental representation of the
atmosphere. Strategies suggested an effort to minimize workload in order to adapt to task
demands. Despite the need for efficiency, military forecasters appeared to maintain system
awareness. All forecasters expressed some understanding of numerical model uncertainty.
KEY WORDS: naturalistic decision-making, weather forecasting, information gathering, verbal
protocol analysis, expertise, situation assessment, strategy

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

INTRODUCTION
We report two studies of naturalistic decision-making among U.S. Navy weather
forecasters. Many previous studies have shown that naturalistic decision making by professional
decision makers departs in significant ways from the behaviors predicted by normative or
descriptive theories based on the notion of utility maximization (Hammond, 1996). One of the
major differences between naturalistic and normative decisions is the stage in the process that is
emphasized. Decision-making can be divided into two broad stages, situation assessment and a
choice point at which the decision is made (Kirschenbaum, 1992). Normative and descriptive
theories focus on the choice point and attempt to model how alternatives are evaluated. In
naturalistic settings, however, it is the previous stage, situation assessment, that is considered
crucial (Klein & Calderwood, 1991; Wohl, 1981).
Situation assessment in weather forecasting entails the examination of large amounts of
data, including weather observations and numerical weather predictions, in order to ascertain
atmospheric conditions. The later choice point involves decisions about the future values of
several weather parameters such as wind speed and precipitation amount. Previous research
suggests that most of the steps in the decision process of military forecasters are devoted to the
earlier stage, situation assessment (Trafton, Kirschenbaum, Tsui, Miyamoto, Ballas, &
Raymond, 2000; Pliske, Klinger, Hutton, Crandall, Knight, & Klein, 1997; Hoffman, 1991;
Hoffman, Coffey, & Ford, 2000).
The exact description of the steps varies slightly by analysis. Most agree that the first
step is assessing global weather patterns (Trafton, et. al 2000; Pliske, et al., 1997). In fact,
forecasters are taught to work down the forecast funnel from the global to local conditions
(Krolak, 2001). Early in the process, expert forecasters identify a weather problem of the day,

3

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

4

such as high winds or fog. This too, is a strategy that is taught in forecaster training. It allows the
forecaster to narrow the scope of information gathering. This is important because one of the
major problems of contemporary weather forecasting is the overwhelming amount of
information available, much of it on the Internet (Pliske et al., 1997).
The second step in the forecasting process is to build an integrated mental model of the
atmosphere (Hoffman, 1991; Pliske et al., 1997; Trafton et al., 2000). Trafton et al. refer to the
mental model as a qualitative three-dimensional representation in which features are spatially
located relative to one another. For expert forecasters the mental model incorporates the physical
cause and effect relationships in the atmosphere as well as the weather features themselves, and
hence integrates each component causally with the rest (Pilske, et al., 1997). Another analysis of
Navy forecasters (Hoffman et al., 2000) suggests that the initial mental model is tested against
various external information sources and adjusted when necessary. According to Trafton et al.
(2000) most information gathering takes place at this point in an effort to check the mental
model. This is the first time, according to Pliske et al. (1997), that expert forecasters enlist the
help of numerical models as decision aids.
Numerical weather prediction models are the primary resource of contemporary weather
forecasting. These computer programs predict weather by transforming the present weather
conditions into the future weather according to known principles of atmospheric physics. Their
predictions are fairly accurate for large-scale phenomenon over short time periods. They become
less accurate for local conditions and for forecasts extending further into the future (typically
past 72 hours). There are several different numerical models available, each with slightly
different assumptions. They almost never agree completely on the weather predictions for a
given time period. Thus, the uncertainty accompanying numerical model predictions can vary

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

5

from one model to the next and from one time period to the next, facts that an expert forecaster
takes into account. In addition, numerical model predictions must be adjusted for local
conditions by the forecaster, a process that requires considerable experience in the local area.
Ultimately, the forecaster must use the information evaluated in the steps described
above to decide upon the particular forecast (e.g., a 24-hour forecast for an adjacent airfield).
Forecasters achieve this by projecting the mental model of the atmosphere forward in time to
derive the future weather conditions (Pliske et al., 1997). Thus, the mental model is actually
four-dimensional, revealing the rate and direction of change over time. Finally, the qualitative
information represented in the mental model is translated back into quantitative forecast values
such as wind speed.
This description is somewhat idealized. All of the researchers cited would agree that the
process is iterative and that there are large individual differences. Forecasters studied by Pliske
et al. (1997) for instance, who had less expertise, like non-experts in other domains
(Kirschenbaum, 1992), were “rule based” problem solvers, rather than relying upon a complete
mental model. Thus, although the above description is helpful in understanding the forecasting
process, one would not expect it to unfold in precisely this way in every naturalistic situation.
While previous work has focused on expertise in weather forecasting, we are also
interested in how the cognitive processes are adapted to less than optimal naturalistic situations.
The Navy forecasters whom we studied worked in a busy weather forecasting office at an air
station in the Pacific Northwest. Forecasting in this setting is accomplished in parallel with a
number of competing duties. We observed one forecaster who was interrupted 13 times while
completing a forecast. An additional challenge for Navy forecasters, compared with their civilian
counterparts in the National Weather Service, is that they are often given important forecasting

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

6

responsibilities after a relatively short training period. Most Navy forecasters have less than one
year of formal training. Civilian forecasters receive a four-year undergraduate degree and some
go on to graduate studies. Navy forecasters may also have limited local forecasting experience
owing to the rapid turnover at any one location.
For Navy forecasters, the limitations in expertise and experience in the local area may
interact with the demands of the task. Research suggests that expertise in forecasting can
mitigate the effects of time pressure (Hammond, Harvey, & Hastie, 1992; Lusk, 1993; Edland &
Svenson, 1993;Heideman, Stewart, Moninger, & Reagan-Cirincione, 1993). Relative immunity
to time pressure may be due to expert forecasters’ ability to zero in on the most predictive cues
under time pressure and filter out less predictive cues (Hammond et. al., 1992). Experts tend to
use raw data rather than processed information, thus avoiding processing biases. Experts also use
historical information because they can extract trends from information observed over time
(Kirschenbaum, 1992). Trends are especially useful in dynamic situations, such as weather
forecasting, because rate and direction of change are crucial to future weather. Novices, on the
other hand, tend to select cues based on ease of access (Kirschenbaum, 1992). The bottom line is
that the more the decision maker knows about the domain, the more systematic and structured
will be the filtration strategies employed (Klein & Calderwood, 1991). Conversely, limitations in
expertise may be a particular disadvantage under time pressure.
As the above review suggests, the information gathering stage of the decision process is
crucial to naturalistic decision-making, varies by level of expertise and is potentially vulnerable
to time pressure. Information gathering strategies provide insight into situation assessment
(Kirschenbaum, 1992) and by extension, the underlying mental representation of the problem.

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

For these reasons we focused our analysis on the information gathering stage of the forecasting
process.
In the first study we assessed on-line thought processes by obtaining think-aloud
protocols from four Navy forecasters while they produced an operational forecast. We then
compared the process revealed by the protocols to the idealized process described above.
Although this approach does not allow for experimental control or systematic manipulation of
independent variables, it has several advantages over the off-line interview methods that are
often employed in the psychological study of weather forecasting. It allowed us to evaluate
constructs such as the "mental model" by applying well-defined criteria to verbal descriptions as
they unfolded in real time, thus avoiding the inaccuracies and biases that sometimes arise from
memory-based self-report (Ericsson & Simon, 1993). It also allowed us to observe the
forecasting process “in the wild” (Hutchins, 1995), which is especially important when studying
information-gathering strategies that may be altered in response to naturally occurring pressures
and advantages. We conducted a follow-up questionnaire study (Study 2) to evaluate the same
issues over a number of different forecasts and weather situations.
STUDY 1: METHOD
Procedure
Four U.S. Navy forecasters verbalized their thoughts as they completed a Terminal Aerodrome
Forecast (TAF). A TAF includes the 24-hour forecast for several parameters including cloud
cover, cloud ceilings, visibility, winds, precipitation and pressure for the 5-mile radius of the
airport.
We recorded an operational rather than a staged forecast in the weather office at the air
station. In addition to the primary computer, on the forecasters’ right there was a second PC

7

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

8

workstation and to the left a weather radar (NEXRAD) and weather satellite workstation. The
room was also equipped with a large plasma screen on the wall above the workstation, used
primarily to brief pilots. We asked forecasters to focus on the primary workstation to simplify
recording. Five sessions were recorded over two days. In order to avoid interfering with the
normal workflow, recordings were made during evening and weekend shifts. We assumed,
however, that the forecasting habits observed were developed to cope with periods of increased
activity as well. Three recordings were made during day watches and two were made during
night watches.
All recording equipment (described below) was set up prior to the session. We recorded
the forecasters’ verbalizations, as well as the video signal from the primary computer
workstation. The visual images were synched to the verbalizations on the resulting videocassette.
Three researchers sat behind the forecaster during the session. Forecasters were
instructed to verbalize their thoughts as they reviewed the data to produce the forecast, focusing
on how the task was actually done rather than on how they were taught to do it. Following
informed consent procedures, audio and video recording was initiated and the forecaster started
working on the TAF. Researchers avoided speaking unless the participant fell silent, when they
prompted the participant to continue verbalizing.
The time to complete the TAF varied. On average, the TAF took one-half an hour. The
shortest TAF was completed in 15 minutes, 56 seconds and the longest was completed 51
minutes, 10 seconds. After the recording session was completed, one researcher asked questions
about years of forecasting experience, the amount of time forecasting at that location, and prior
experience in the Navy.
Participants

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

9

One civilian and three current military weather forecasters were selected to participate
based on availability. The sample spanned a wide range of expertise, ranging from 6 months
forecasting experience to more than 20 years. All participants had completed the Navy's course
of basic training for weather forecasters. One forecaster was recorded twice.
Equipment
The principle recording was made on a S-VHS cassette with a JVC SRV10U S-VHS
VCR. A Focus Enhancements TVPro AV 1600 scan converter provided a S-video feed from the
forecaster’s workstation, which was running in 1024x768 VGA mode. The audio feed was from
a Shure SM57 dynamic microphone run through a Yamaha MT-120S four-track cassette
recorder. The MT-120S provided necessary impedance conversion and gain control on the audio
track. In addition the MT-120S allowed a simultaneous, separate audio recording on an
audiocassette to be made for later use in a transcription machine. A Sony Hi-8 camcorder was
connected to the audio and video outputs of the JVC VCR to monitor the recording. The S-VHS
recording was later played back with the JVC VCR on a JVC TM1605SU 16” professional video
monitor. A micro-cassette recording was also made on a separate micro-cassette recorder as a
backup.
Coding
Auditory recordings were broken down into individual numbered statements to isolate
units of meaning that could be readily coded in the content areas of interest. Two independent
coders broke the same transcript into statements. Reliability was determined by counting the
number of statements coded identically and dividing by the total number of statements. The
same procedure was used to determine coder reliability in the subsequent categories as well.
Overall coder reliability ranged 89–92%. Disagreements were discussed and a consensus was

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

10

reached. Statements were assigned two basic kinds of codes, statement type and source of
information.
Two statement types were defined: decision statements and pre-decision statements. A
decision was a statement in which a value for some parameter in the TAF was selected and
simultaneously typed into the TAF form by the forecaster as noted in the video recording.
Statements that preceded decisions were coded as pre-decision statements. Pre-decision
statements were coded for the source of the information. A statement was coded for a particular
source of information if it was named in the statement or if it was identifiable on the video
recording and the display itself was referenced in the statement. There were seven general source
codes:
Numerical models: A number of different numerical weather prediction models were
available, typically via the Internet. These include the University Washington’s implementation
of the MM5 model, the Navy’s own numerical model called NOGAPS, and several others
including the National Weather Service’s ETA and AVN.
Satellite imagery: This category included satellite images accessed through the Internet or
dedicated communication sources.
Surface observations: This category included standardized reports of the current weather at
various locations.
Local TAFs: This category included TAFs produced at other airfields in the region.
Radar: This category included images that were products of real-time reflectivity and
Doppler-derived wind velocity such as rainfall over a kilometer square grid, wind direction and
speed.

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

11

Weather discussions: This category included the forecaster discussions of the weather that
are made available on the Internet.
Knowledge: This category included information from forecasters’ mental knowledge base.
This source was not named directly by the participant but inferred by the coder based on content.
Knowledge was broken down into local knowledge and numerical model knowledge. Local
knowledge was inferred if the statement made reference to the impact of local terrain on the
weather, such as impact of the mountain ranges on local wind patterns. Numerical model
knowledge was inferred if the statement made reference to the dynamics or trustworthiness of
the numerical models.
Because generating a TAF is a complex multi-step process, we identified five
intermediate goals, denoting the overall objective of the activity described in that section. We
then divided statement sequences into sections under non-overlapping goals. The choice of goal
titles was influenced by work of Trafton et al., (2000) and others. As the analysis below reveals,
some forecasters did not appear to pursue all five goals. The following goals were identified.
Analyze synoptic scale weather patterns: This goal was assigned when forecasters discussed
large-scale weather patterns such as the movement of high- or low-pressure areas, pressure
gradients, cloud patterns in satellite imagery, and sometimes wind direction.
Evaluate information sources to determine specific parameter values: This stage began
when the forecaster first mentioned specifics of the forecast parameters, such as timing of the
precipitation, cloud heights, visibility, wind speed and direction, and pressure.
Consolidate mental model: This goal was assigned when forecasters described a coherent
qualitative four-dimensional, causally interrelated, spatial/temporal representation of the weather

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

12

that did not refer directly to some external information source and incorporated more than one
parameter.
Check model: This goal was assigned when forecasters compared the above-mentioned
representation to other sources of information with the express purpose of evaluating the mental
representation.
Write TAF: This goal was assigned when forecasters began to type information into the
notepad.
STUDY 1: RESULTS
Information gathering strategies
The total number of statements varied by forecaster (Table 1) so much of the data in the
analyses of information gathering strategies was summarized as a percentage of the statements
made by each forecaster in the category of interest. We investigated four major issues with
respect to information gathering. We expected the majority of information gathering to take
place in the middle of the forecasting process. Next, we expected that the forecasters would rely
heavily on the numerical models. We also thought that they would rely on few information
sources overall. Finally we anticipated that they would narrow their information search using a
weather problem of the day.
We identified the stage at which information gathering took place by assigning goals to
statements according to the rules described above and then examining the goal structure of each
forecaster. Before we begin, it should be noted that all forecasters shared three of the five goals
identified, only forecaster B was assigned all 5 goals. The first of the three, shared goals was the
synoptic scale analysis of the weather. Next all of the forecasters progressed to an evaluation of
specific parameters. They also shared the final goal, writing the TAF.

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

13

Only Forecaster B conformed completely to the expected pattern, gathering little
information in the preliminary and final stages and the majority of the information in the middle
stage (Table 1). Forecasters A and C conformed partially to our expectations. Contrary to our
expectations, Forecasters A (40%) and C (50%) made a large proportion of information source
statements while pursuing Goal 1, the synoptic scale analysis. As expected, Forecasters A and C
also gathered a large proportion of information in the second stage and very little in the third
stage, suggesting that they had already examined the bulk of the information sources by the time
they started writing the TAF. The approach of Forecaster D was completely contrary to our
expectations and unique. He made very few information source statements (6% in the first TAF
and 5% in the second) while pursuing the second goal, evaluation of specific parameters.
Surprisingly, he made the majority of his information source statements after he began writing
his TAF (61% & 78%) in the final stage of the process.
To determine the specific information sources forecasters evaluated, we examined the
source codes assigned to each statement. We expected forecasters to rely heavily upon the
numerical models (Doswell, 1992) and to use few information sources overall. These
expectations were confirmed. We inferred the degree to which a source was used from the
percent of information source statements referring to it. For every forecaster, the largest
percentage of information source statements referred to the numerical models (Table 2). For
every forecaster this pattern was significantly different than would be expected by chance. The
second largest external source of information for every forecaster was surface observations of
the current weather conditions. It is interesting to note that Forecaster B, with the greatest
amount of experience, relied on the surface observations more, and less on the numerical models
than the other forecasters did.

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

14

Next we examined the information source statements by parameter and forecaster
expertise. For the subsequent analyses, cloud cover, visibility and cloud ceilings were considered
a single category as were wind speed and direction. In addition to specific parameters we
included a category of synoptic analysis in order to capture the sources upon which forecasters
relied when they were getting the “big picture.” For the synoptic analysis all forecasters relied
most heavily on the numerical models (Table 3). They also used the greatest number of different
numerical models during the synoptic-scale analysis. This was due largely to the process of
comparing the numerical models to one another in an attempt to assess the quality of the
numerical model forecast.
Beyond that, source use varied by both parameter and expertise (Table 3). The two
forecasters with the least experience (Forecasters C & D) relied most heavily on the numerical
models in all four parameter categories. The two most experienced forecasters, Forecasters A (12
years) and B (20+ years), relied most heavily on the surface observations for two categories,
cloud cover/visibility/precipitation and pressure. They relied most heavily on the numerical
models for the remaining two categories.
The self-imposed limitation in sources was most apparent when examining numerical
model usage closely. Although many models are available, all four forecasters relied primarily
on one, the University of Washington’s MM5. Of the 271 statements referring to models, 195
(72%) referred to a single numerical model, the MM5. The majority of references to models
other than the MM5 (63%, 48 of 76) occurred during the synoptic scale analysis. In addition,
very few numerical model products were used. The numerical models offer perhaps the richest
source of information for forecasters. The University of Washington’s MM5 web interface offers
approximately 100 different charts, graphs and tables of relevance to the TAF. The forecasters

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

15

used only 11 of these in the five forecasts studied here. Much of the time (64%) spent looking at
numerical models was focused on only five products.
Next we explored forecasters' use of a “weather problem of the day” to narrow their
information search. In the context of the TAF, the weather problem of the day can be inferred
from the degree to which forecasters emphasized one parameter over another, reflected in the
proportion of statements referring to that parameter. To determine whether forecasters made a
similar proportion of statements referring to each parameter, chi-square analyses were computed
for each forecaster. For every forecaster except Forecaster D, the difference was significant
(Table 4). Moreover, the emphasized parameter varied somewhat by forecaster.
Because the forecasts observed were made over three consecutive days, the forecasters
were primarily concerned with different stages in the passage of the same strong low pressure
system that was located offshore and heading toward the coast on Monday, February 18, 2002
(Figure 1). Forecaster A wrote his TAF on Sunday evening as a weak low passed through the
forecast area preceding the stronger system that was still located offshore. The largest proportion
of his statements referred to winds. He was concerned with the timing of the shift in wind
direction and the increase in wind speed that would accompany the second front. Six hours later,
when Forecaster B's TAF was written, the stronger low-pressure system was closer to the
coastline. The largest proportion of his statements concerned cloud cover and precipitation
because he was concerned with the onset and duration of the rainfall. He also had some concerns
about fog. Forecaster C, writing his TAF 12 hours after Forecaster B, also made the largest
proportion of statements referring to cloud cover and precipitation. The satellite imagery
available at the time showed a break in the shield of clouds and embedded rain approaching the
forecast area. Consequently, he was concerned with the timing of the beginning and end of two

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

16

periods of rain surrounding the break. Finally, Forecaster D's forecast period included the time
during which the low-pressure area passed directly over the forecast region. He made the largest
proportion of statements concerning pressure because he was concerned with how far it would
drop and when the lowest pressure would occur. He was also concerned with when the pressure
would begin to rise again. Thus, both the unequal proportions of statements devoted to
individual parameters as well as closer examination of the statements supports the notion that
forecasters focused on a weather problem of the day.
There was also evidence suggesting that forecasters used ease of access to narrow their
search. Forecaster D used the application that provides access to NOGAPS numerical model
information to determine pressure. The choice appears to have been motivated by NOGAPS
convenient interactive interface. Unlike other models, it allows the forecaster to request pressure
at a very specific location.
Mental representation
We were interested in three issues concerning forecasters’ mental representation of the
problem space. We expected that it would include information about the numerical models
themselves and we questioned whether it would include a complete four-dimensional mental
model of the atmosphere. We address these issues in order.
Because forecasters relied heavily upon the numerical models, we expected that they
would have some knowledge about model dynamics, that is, system awareness. The general
category of numerical model knowledge was further divided into three sub-categories. The first,
initialization, is the starting point of the numerical model, and includes a blend of actual weather
observations (e.g., temperature, wind speed) and estimates for parameter values at locations
where no observations are available. Model forecasts are more accurate over short periods so a

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

17

recent initialization is better. Statements revealing knowledge about the starting conditions of
the model or the recency of the initialization were included in this sub-category. The next subcategory is model bias—artifacts of the algorithms used to produce the model prediction lead to
systematic errors. Statements that referred to biases related to specific seasons, types of terrain or
weather situations were included in this sub-category. The final sub-category is model
uncertainty—strategies used to check and adjust numerical model output, such as comparing a
past forecast to observations. We found that every forecaster made statements indicating
numerical model knowledge. Most forecasters made statements in each of the three
subcategories, initialization, numerical model bias and numerical model uncertainty. Only
Forecaster C failed to conform to this pattern; he made no initialization statements.
When categorized by goal, most numerical model knowledge statements were made
during the synoptic scale analysis in Goal 1. Almost every forecaster made a substantial
proportion of numerical model knowledge statements in pursuit of the first goal. The only
exception was Forecaster B who did not look at the models at this stage. Recall that forecasters
referred to the greatest number of different numerical models during the synoptic scale analysis,
as well. Examination of the transcripts suggested that both results were due to the fact that most
forecasters devoted considerable effort evaluating overall numerical model performance during
the synoptic-scale analysis. The primary technique they used was to compare the rate at which
the weather system advanced in the numerical models to other sources of information, such as
the satellite images. This appeared to be a process of mentally lining up the patterns in the
separate displays and then monitoring parallel changes in prominent features over time. Such
direct comparison was rare beyond Goal 1. The TAFs of Forecasters A and B suggest that they

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

18

may have adjusted their forecasts accordingly, although Forecaster A is the only one who
announced this intention explicitly.
Occasionally, forecasters also evaluated numerical model performance with respect to
specific parameter values. This appeared to be a process of comparing the predicted to the
observed values for past or present time periods—Forecasters A and C compared the predicted
winds to the observed winds. Similarly, Forecasters B and D compared predicted to observed
pressure values. We assumed that the purpose of such comparisons was to adjust numerical
model values when a discrepancy was detected. For example, when Forecaster D determined that
the pressure predicted by NOGAPS was 0.05 inches high he made an explicit attempt to adjust
the values accordingly (Figure 2). He remarked further that NOGAPS underforecasts both
dropping and rising pressures (model bias) to explain why he thought the error had occurred.
All forecasters referred to the workings and the biases of the models, suggesting that
system awareness was a component in their mental representation of the problem space. These
data imply a process in which forecasters first assess the quality of the numerical model
prediction and then adjust their own forecast accordingly, taking into account systematic biases.
Next we asked whether forecasters' mental representations included a complete mental
model of the atmosphere that could be compared to external information sources, adjusted and
projected forward in time to produce the forecast. Only Forecaster B, with the greatest amount of
experience, described a volume of space with relative positions (e.g., “behind it,” “approaching
the coast”), more than one parameter (precipitation, pressure, temperature) and causal elements
(“weak high pressure building behind it”). It also included evolution over time, e.g., “late
tomorrow night.”

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

19

A complete mental model such as this was not detected in the majority of the verbal
protocols of the U.S. Navy forecasters observed in this study. Forecaster A, for instance,
described a partial mental model of the wind patterns. Upon closer inspection he appeared to be
referring to a “rule of thumb” (Doswell, 1986), rather than a mental model. The rule has an if–
then format and can be characterized as, “If a system approaches the coast, then there will be
strong winds out of the southeast over the forecast area.” Two other forecasters (C and D) refer
to this same rule of thumb. A rule of thumb interpretation is further supported when Forecaster A
continues, “These systems aren't normal. It's a weak trough, so it's going to act a little bit
different than a normal front coming through.” This remark suggests that the situation did not
conform perfectly to the “if” portion of the rule, requiring an adjustment. The very fact that a
mismatch was noted suggests comparison to a pre-formulated rule. If he had been reasoning
from a four-dimensional mental model the forecast would result directly from the manipulations
of the causal elements of the mental representation precluding both comparison and mismatch.
We discovered many similar if–then rules among the local knowledge statements; 29
statements (36%, 29/81) had the general if–then format and could also be considered rules of
thumb. Every forecaster except the most experienced, Forecaster B, made statements that could
be classified as if–then rules. Thus, the mental representations of these three forecasters appeared
to be separate partial models at best, including elements relating to a single parameter, or simple
rules of thumb. There was no evidence that these representations were ever integrated into a
unified mental model of the atmosphere.
STUDY 1: DISCUSSION
The weather forecasting process revealed in this analysis was similar in some respects to
the idealized process noted in previous research. As expected, the four forecasters we studied

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

20

evaluated relatively few information sources before arriving at their decisions. Limiting
information is not remarkable given the overwhelming amount of information available to
contemporary forecasters (Pliske et al., 1997). However, the limitation observed here might be
more extreme than in many forecasting situations due to the fact that the information gathering
strategies we observed probably evolved under time pressure and task switching demands. These
conclusions, however, remain tentative, because the think-aloud procedure was conducted, of
necessity, during less busy periods, and time pressure was not systematically manipulated to
allow a direct comparison.
Although some information sources were selected for ease of access, most of the
forecasters appeared to narrow their information search by focusing on a weather problem of the
day. The pattern of emphasis suggested that the forecasters each had a slightly different concern
that was related to the movement of a strong low-pressure system. This claim would be
strengthened by multiple observations per forecaster showing varying patterns of emphasis
corresponding to differing weather conditions. However, the fact that the parameter of focus was
slightly different for each forecaster rules out the alternative explanation that one parameter was
intrinsically more difficult and hence required more effort for that reason.
All four forecasters relied heavily on the numerical models, but did not accept the model
predictions on face value. Each forecaster had some understanding of numerical model
dynamics, understood that model inputs are sometimes less trustworthy and made some attempt
to evaluate model output. Thus, there was strong evidence that each forecaster maintained a
mental representation of the dynamics of the numerical models themselves.
The information sources used by forecasters varied to a certain extent by expertise—the
two least experienced (C and D) relied most heavily on the numerical models for all parameters,

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

21

while the two most experienced (A and B) relied least on the numerical models and more on the
surface observations. Moreover, Forecaster B, the most experienced, did not look at the
numerical models until later in the process. This suggests that, like experts in other domains
(Kirschenbaum, 1992), experience allowed Forecasters B to make better use of the raw data and
depend less upon the processed information provided by the models. This is especially
advantageous when numerical model predictions are less trustworthy. It may allow experienced
forecasters to do a better job of evaluating numerical model performance in the first place. In
addition such expertise allows them to generate a forecast directly from the raw data if
necessary. It is important to note that weather forecasting is one of the few domains in which
human decision makers have improved on decision aids such as the numerical models (Swets,
Dawes, & Monahan, 2000).
The forecasting process that we observed, reflected in forecasters' goal structure,
conformed in some respects to expectations derived from previous research. We found that all
four forecasters began with a synoptic scale analysis and progressed to an evaluation of specific
parameters as they were trained. The process of Forecaster B, the most experienced, followed
most closely the idealized process derived from previous work. He did the bulk of his
information gathering during the middle stage of the process and was the only forecaster who
had a separate stage at which he consolidated a mental model of the weather and then checked it
against other information sources. He made no rule of thumb statements. In a manner similar to
the idealized process, he employed very few external information sources while creating his
mental representation. He also did not look at the numerical models while pursuing Goal 1, the
synoptic-scale analysis, but rather conducted his initial analysis based entirely upon direct
observational sources. Similar to other expert forecasters (Hoffman, 1991; Pliske et al., 1997;

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

22

Trafton et al., 2000), he used the numerical model predictions mainly to check his already
established mental model. It is not possible to distinguish whether this is attributable to expertise
per se or to the era in which he was trained, before the widespread use of numerical models.
The other three forecasters deviated to different degrees from the idealized process.
Although several partial mental models were observed, for none of the other forecasters was
there evidence of a representation with all of the features of the four-dimensional mental model
described in previous research. Instead, much of the problem solving of these three forecasters
was based on if–then rules. This is consistent with the approach observed in non-experts in other
studies (Kirschenbaum, 1992; Pliske et al., 1997).
The results reported here may differ from those of other studies for several reasons. As
noted above, military forecasters, in general, have less expertise than civilian forecasters.
Perhaps some of the forecasters we studied had not yet developed the skills required to create
and maintain a mental model. Another possible explanation for the difference in results is
methodological. We inferred a mental model only when forecasters' verbalized thought
processes revealed all the elements that were included in the definition. We did not ask directly
about mental models. Much of the previous research that reports more widespread use of mental
models of the atmosphere relied upon interviews conducted after the fact. Thus, our criteria may
have been more restrictive causing us to miss phenomena. Participants may have failed to
mention a relevant feature about which they were thinking. Alternatively, the mental models
detected in previous research may have been an artifact of experimental procedures.

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

23

STUDY 2: METHOD
The second study was undertaken to confirm the basic results of Study 1. The verbal
protocol approach allowed an in depth analysis of the mental processes involved in naval
forecasting. It was limited, however, to 5 forecasts. The question for Study 2 was whether the
streamlined approach we observed in Study 1 would be observed over several forecasts and
weather conditions. In addition, in Study 2, we asked whether information gathering strategies
and model evaluation techniques varied from one situation to the next. Study 1 revealed that
Navy forecaster relied heavily on numerical models. Because of this emphasis, understanding
when model predictions are more or less trustworthy is crucial to decision making. We
anticipated that information sources and model evaluation techniques observed in Study 2 would
be related to the forecasters assessment of model performance, which would in turn be related to
their confidence in the forecast.
Procedure
Forecasters filled out 22 anonymous Web-based questionnaires over the course of four
months (12/02–3/03). Forecasters were instructed to complete each questionnaire immediately
after writing a TAF in the course of their everyday duties. Researchers provided an in-person
demonstration of how to access the questionnaire and to create an anonymous identification code
at the outset of the study. Researchers were not present when any of the questionnaires were
completed.
Participants

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

24

Four forecasters from NAS Whidbey Island participated anonymously. They will be
referred to as forecasters E, F, G, and H. All participants completed the Navy's course of basic
training for weather forecasters. They were not compensated for their participation.
Questionnaire
Each questionnaire asked the forecaster to indicate the sources of information used for
the TAF just completed. The questionnaire provided check boxes for the five general sources of
information used by forecasters in Study 1, 1) numerical models, 2) satellite data imagery, 3)
observational data, 4) other TAFs and 5) weather discussions. Similar check boxes listed seven
techniques to evaluate model predictions used by forecasters in Study 1. These included
comparing the models to various other sources of information and using knowledge about model
biases. For each list an “other” box was also provided allowing forecasters to type in additional
answers. The questionnaire also asked forecasters to fill out a series of rating scales to evaluate
the performance of each model they used, their confidence in their own forecast and the
difficulty of the TAF just completed. Finally, they indicated the weather problem of the day and
the parameters (e.g., wind speed, cloud ceilings, etc.) in which they had the most and least
confidence and were asked to provide the reason for their level of confidence.
STUDY 2: RESULTS
Information gathering strategies
As with Study 1, responses revealed that Navy forecasters relied on very few information
sources, primarily the numerical models, when producing the TAF. Two models, the MM5 and
NOGAPS, were used in the majority of the forecasts. A third model, the AVN, was used on 2 of
the 22 forecasts. In addition, all four forecasters used the satellite imagery, observations and
other TAFS for every forecast they wrote. The U.S. weather discussions were read for the

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

25

majority of TAFS as well. With the exception of a lightening detector and the WSR88 radar to
detect thunderstorms, each used for a single TAF, no other sources of information were
mentioned. In sum, forecasters used remarkably similar information sources on all of the TAFs
in the study.
A weather problem of the day was indicated on 16 of the 22 questionnaires. Of these 9
were problems with the weather and the remaining seven were problems with the computer
models. The weather problems concerned cloud ceilings and fog in four cases, synoptic patterns
(frontal shift, orientation of low pressure, timing) in three cases and precipitation in two cases.
Model problems were situations in which the forecaster had determined that model predictions
were untrustworthy because of error detected in the output (e.g. “models are underforecasting
winds”). Model ratings were slightly lower when model problems were cited. In one case a
general model bias was cited (e.g., “models have a hard time handling strong pressure systems”).
Although a weather problem was identified for nine of the TAFs it did not appear to be used to
narrow the forecasters’ information search because similarity sources used.
Model evaluation techniques
Forecasters reported using the same two major model evaluation techniques that were
observed in Study 1. They compared synoptic weather patterns shown in the model initialization
to satellite images (86% of TAFs), and they compared predicted to observed parameter values
(73% of TAFs). Occasionally they compared model predictions to other TAFs (45% of TAFs)
and less often to other models (32% of TAFs). They also used their understanding of the current
weather situation (77% of TAFs) and model biases (41% of TAFs) to evaluate model
performance. In addition to asking about techniques observed in Study 1, we also asked about a
technique that is often recommended, but which we failed to observe—the evaluation of model

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

26

performance over the previous few days (trends in model performance). This technique was
indicated on only four of the 22 TAFs in Study 2.
To determine whether strategies varied with model performance, we examined
forecasters’ rating of the models’ performance. Forecasters rated model performance on a 1–5
scale, ranging from poor to excellent performance. Forecasters rarely gave the models very poor
ratings. The MM5, for instance, was rated as average or above (3 or greater) on 19 of the 22
TAFs. Ratings for the other models followed a similar pattern.
We anticipated that forecasters would alter their forecasting strategies when model
performance rating declined, perhaps using additional evaluation techniques or sources of
information. However, neither the sources of information nor evaluation techniques correlated
with the model performance rating due in part to the small variance of model performance
ratings. We also noted little variation in the forecasting routine; Forecasters E and F used
virtually the same information sources on every forecast. The other two forecasters indicated
slightly more variability in the products they used, but the number of sources was not related to
model ratings. Likewise, the number of model evaluation techniques did not increase
systematically as model rating decreased. Again this appeared to be due in part to the use of a
routine. Forecaster E used the very same evaluation techniques for both the MM5 and NOGAPS
on 90% of his TAFs. With few exceptions, the same was true of Forecasters F and G.
We anticipated that confidence in the forecast might be related to model performance
rating. In fact confidence in the forecast did not appear to be related to any of the other variables
measured. The written explanation for forecaster confidence proved revealing. The explanations
fell into two general categories. In the first, level of confidence was explained by the degree to
which the observed situation conformed to a rule-of-thumb, such as, “A building ridge leads to

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

27

light winds, normally….” The logic seemed to be that when the situation at hand conforms to the
“if” part of the conditional, one can be confident that the “then” will follow. In the second
category, degree of confidence was explained in terms of model strengths and weaknesses. For
example, one forecaster explained lack of confidence in his pressure forecast because, “Models
have a hard time handling strong pressure systems.”

STUDY 2: DISCUSSION
Study 2 confirmed many of the basic results of Study 1. As with Study 1, forecasters’
information search was limited to a few key sources and focused on the same two numerical
models. The model evaluation techniques were similar to those observed in Study 1 as well. The
majority involved comparing model initialization to other sources of information, primarily
satellite imagery. However, forecasters made direct comparisons between models less frequently
and rarely examined model performance over the previous few days. As with Study 1,
forecasters in Study 2 referred often to rule of thumb forecasting and were aware of basic system
dynamics involved in the numerical models they were using. Their confidence in the forecast
appeared to be related to the degree to which the situation conformed to general principles in
these categories rather than specifics in the given forecasting situations. That is, confidence was
high when the weather situation conformed to a well-known rule of thumb or was a situation the
numerical models were known to handle well.
We were surprised to learn in Study 2 that the majority of forecasters studied had
developed a forecasting routine that varied little. This was true despite the different weather
problems of the day identified in many of the TAFs. The routine approach observed here may
have been a response to the pressures inherent in the forecasting situation. Making on-line

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

28

adjustments to information search and model evaluation in response to the current situation
requires conscious-level processing, working memory. On the other hand, using a static, proven
forecasting routine requires little in the way of conscious adjustment. Once memorized the
routine can be stored in long-term memory, retrieved and enacted automatically, making few
demands on working memory resources. Clearly this was an effective approach; the average
score on the Navy’s scoring system for the forecasts reported here was 80 out of 100 points.

GENERAL DISCUSSION
These two studies suggest that Navy weather forecasting depends largely on strategies
designed to reduce working memory load. For instance, the evidence reported here suggests that
most Navy forecasters rely on rules of thumb rather than on creating a mental model of the
atmosphere. These results can be explained in terms of the information processing demands of a
mental model. Maintaining a complex interrelated mental model makes heavy demands on
conscious-level processing identified as “working memory”. It has long been known that human
information processing has severe limitations in this regard (Miller, 1956; Baddeley, 1987). Add
to this the fact that forecasters are usually interrupted several times in the process of forecasting,
forcing them to direct attention away from the forecasting task for several minutes at a time.
Holding all of the details of the full-fledged mental model of the atmosphere in consciousness,
while directing attention away from the forecasting task to an unrelated task and then back again,
may be an overwhelming requirement. The unusual approach of Forecaster D in Study 1 tends to
support this argument. Recall that he left much of the information gathering and analysis until he
began to write the TAF. This approach may have been due to an inability to maintain large
quantities of information pertaining to the various parameters simultaneously, across multiple

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

29

interruptions, for long enough to write the TAF. As a result he may simply have developed an
approach in which he did not bother to evaluate the information until he needed it in the writing
process.
Although it is possible that the rule-based approach observed here is a stage on the path
to expertise, we speculate that it is a successful adaptation to the circumstances in which the task
is performed. Rules of thumb, which require much less mental processing capacity, may be the
preferred approach in the decision-making environment in the U.S. Navy weather forecast
center. Rules of thumb can be stored in long-term memory and, once learned, require minimal
concentration to maintain. As such, the strain on conscious-level processing is diminished. In the
process of forecasting, one need only evaluate the current conditions to determine whether there
is a match with the “if” condition. Then the rule can be applied with minimal additional effort.
The disadvantage of the rule-of-thumb approach is that when the present situation is not a good
match to the “if” condition, adjustment is indicated but difficult without a mental model.
Nonetheless, every forecaster observed appeared to have some understanding of the
uncertainty inherent in numerical model predictions. Most attempts to assess model uncertainty
occurred in the synoptic scale analysis early in the process and involved comparing previous
model forecasts to current data. Clearly Navy forecasters have some basic understanding of
numerical model uncertainty and devote a significant proportion of their process to this
endeavor. Some evidence suggested that forecasters used this information to make adjustments
to the numerical model forecast, essentially turning uncertainty into a deterministic forecast.
However, the forecasters we studied appeared to avoid potentially informative but
computationally intensive analyses such as direct comparisons of numerical models and
evaluation of trends in model error. It is important to note that although the use of probabilistic

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

30

products is of growing interest to the weather forecasting community (National Academies,
1999; National Research Council, 2003) and most major numerical weather prediction centers
produce probabilistic forecast products, we did not observe naval weather forecasters using
probabilistic information.
Study 2 revealed that both information gathering and model evaluation appeared to have
been reduced to a routine. Forecasters relied upon a few favored models and products suggesting
selection based in habit rather than on the weather problem of the day or on superior relative
performance of the computer model in the current situation. The forecasting routines observed in
Study 2 suggest that rather than adapting the forecasting procedure to the particular situation, a
working memory intensive approach, forecasters relied on a set routine that could be stored in
long-term memory. The drawback of the strategies outlined here is that, although they are
efficient and effective much of the time, they are inflexible.
Much of the data presented here suggests that situation assessment in the forecasting
process that we observed was streamlined for efficiency. Forecasters used very few sources of
information overall and relied heavily on the numerical model decision aides. Nonetheless, every
forecaster made some effort to evaluate numerical model output, usually early in the synoptic
scale analysis. When making forecasting decisions, we found that most Navy forecasters relied
upon forecasting routines and rules of thumb rather than elaborate mental models of the
atmosphere. We submit that instead of an error or a deviation from prescribed analytic
procedures, such strategies may well be a successful adaptation to the circumstances. They
provided the forecasters with adequate answers and allowed them to get the job done in a timely
fashion.

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

31

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the DOD Multidisciplinary University Research
Initiative (MURI) program administered by the Office of Naval Research under Grant N0001401-10745.

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

32

REFERENCES
Baddeley, A.D. (1987, c1986). Working memory. Oxford psychology series: no.11. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Doswell, C.A. (1986). The human element in weather forecasting. National Weather Digest, 2,
6-17.
Doswell, C.A. (1992). Forecaster workstation design: concepts and issues, Weather and
Forecasting, 7, 398-407.
Edland, A., & Svenson, O. (1993). Judgment and decision making under time pressure: Studies
and findings. In O. Svenson and A.M. Maule (Eds.), Time pressure and stress in human
judgment and decision making (pp. 27-40). New York: Plenum Press.
Ericsson, K.A., & Simon, H.A. (1993). Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Hammond, K.R., Harvey, L.O., & Hastie, R. (1992). Marking better use of scientific
knowledge: Separating truth from justice. Psychological Science, 3, 80-87.
Hammond, K.R. (1996). Human judgment and social policy. Oxford: University Press.
Heideman, K.F., Stewart, T.R., Moninger, W.R., & Reagan-Cirincione, P. (1993). The weather
information and skill experiment (WISE): The effect of varying levels of information on
forecast skill. Weather and Forecasting, 8, 25-36.
Hoffman R.R. (1991). Human factors psychology in the support of forecasting: The design of
advanced meteorological workstations. Weather and Forecasting, 6, 98-110.
Hoffman R.R, Coffey J.W., & Ford, K.M. (2000). A case study in the research paradigm of
human-centered computing: Local expertise in weather forecasting. Report to the National
Technology Alliance, Arlington, VA.

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

33

Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Kantowitz, B.H., & Campbell, J.L. (1996). Automation and human performance: Theory and
applications. In R. Parasuraman & M. Mouloua (Eds.), Human factors in transportation
(pp. 117-136). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Klein, G.A., & Calderwood, R. (1991). Decision models: Some lessons from the field. IEEE
Transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics, 21, 1018-1026.
Kirschenbaum, S.S. (1992). Influence of experience on information-gathering strategies.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 343-352.
Krolak, R., AGC (AW/SW) (2001). Aerographer’s Mate: Module 5- Basic Meteorology,
NAVEDTRA 14312. U.S. Naval Education and Training Professional Development and
Technology Center, U.S. Navy.
Lusk, C.M. (1993). Assessing components of judgments in an operational setting: The effects
of time pressure on aviation weather forecasting. In O. Svenson and A.M. Maule (Eds.),
Time pressure and stress in human judgment and decision making (pp. 309-321). New
York: Plenum Press.
Miller, G.A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our
capacity for processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
National Academies Report (1999). A vision for the National Weather Service: Road map for
the future. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
National Research Council (2003). Environmental information for naval warfare. Washington,
D.C.: The National Academies Press.
Pliske, R., Klinger, D., Hutton, R., Crandall, B., Knight, B., & Klein, G. (1997). Understanding
skilled weather forecasting: Implications for training and design of forecasting tools.

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

34

Technical Report AL/HR-CR-1997-003, Air Force Material Command, Armstrong
Laboratoy, Human Systems Directorate.
Swets, J.A., Dawes, R.M., & Monahan, J. (2000). Psychological science can improve
diagnostic decisions. Psychological Sciences in the Public Interest (a supplement to
Psychological Science), 1, 1-26.
Trafton G.J., Kirschenbaum S.S., Tsui T.L., Miyamoto R.T., Ballas J.A., & Raymond P.D.
(2000). Turning pictures into numbers: extracting and generating information from complex
visualizations. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 53, 827-850.
Wohl, J.G. (1981). Force management requirements of Air Force tactical command and control.
IEEE Transactions and Systems, Man, and Cypbernetics, SMC11, 9, 618-639.

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

35

Table 1. Statements Categorized by Goal
Forecaster
Goal 1: Synoptic Analysis Source
statements
Goal 2: Specific Parameter Source
statements
Goal 3: Write TAF Source statements

A

B

C

D1

D2

138/346

12/155

32/64

15/94

12/36

40%

8%

50%

16%

33%

178/346

101/155

25/64

6/94

2/36

52%

65%

40%

6%

5%

30/346

5/155

7/64

73/94

22/36

9%

3%

11%

78%

61%

Mean %
31%
33.6%
32.4%

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

36

Table 2. Percent of total source statements referring to each source by each forecaster
Forecaster
Source
A

B

55%
Numerical
Models

C

D1

D2

57%

79%

MM5 33%

MM5 48%

NOGAPs 23%

NOGAPS 31%

70%

MM5 38%

40%

MM5 43%

NOGAPS 15%

MM5 40%

NGM 14%

Other 2%

ETA 14%

Satellite

2%

6%

7%

17%

7%

Radar

8%

1%

5%

0%

0%

Surface

21%

33%

9%

20%

7%

3%

0%

0%

0%

0%

11%

21%

9%

7%

7%

χ2 (5, N = 242)

χ2 (5, N = 123)

χ2 (5, N = 44)

χ2 (5, N = 60) =

χ2 (5, N = 29) =

= 294.78*

= 107.59*

= 93.18*

81.60*

82.93*

Forecast
Discussion
Regional TAFs
Chi-square

* p < .01.

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

Table 3. Source relied upon most heavily by each forecaster for each parameter
Forecaster

Synoptic

Cloud/Vis/Precip

Wind

Pressure

A

Models 54%

Surface Obs 28%

Models 49%

Surface Obs 52%

B

Models 33%

Surface Obs 45%

Models 50%

Surface Obs 35%

C

Models 61%

Models 21%

Models 9%

Models 100%

D1

Models 31%

Models 40%

Models 23%

Models 47%

D2

Models 64%

Models 43%

Models 67%

Models 75%

37

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

38

Table 4. Statements referring to forecast parameters
Forecaster
Parameter
A

B

C

D1

D2

107 (33%)

68 (44%)

34 (52%)

48 (31%)

33 (43%)

Winds

170 (52%)

55 (35%)

21 (32%)

42 (27%)

19 (25%)

Pressure

51 (16%)

34 (22%)

10 (15%)

63 (41%)

24 (32%)

328

156

65

153

76

χ2 (2, N = 328)

χ2 (2, N = 156)

χ2 (2, N = 65)

χ2 (2, N = 153)

χ2 (2, N = 76)

= 64.84*

= 11.23*

= 13.32*

= 4.59

= 3.97

Clouds/visibility/
precipitation

Total Statements
Chi-square

*p < .01.

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

Figure Captions

Figure 1. GOES 10 Infrared Satellite Picture of 0000 UTC 18 Feb 2002

Figure 2. Process by which Forecaster D arrived at pressure forecast

39

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

40

Strategies in naturalistic decision making

Access NOGAPS predicted pressure for current time

29.69

Access current local pressure and subtract from NOGAPS

29.69 - 29.64 = .05

Access NOGAPS predicted pressure for forecast period

29.59 - .05 = 29.54

and subtract error amount

Explanation: NOGAPS has a tendency to under forecast dropping pressure
(leading to observed error)

Forecast

29.54

41

