Kruskal-Wallis and Friedman type tests for
nested effects in hierarchical designs

1

Assaf P. Oron and Peter D. Hoff
Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle
assaf@u.washington.edu, hoff@stat.washington.edu

Working Paper no. 68
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
University of Washington
December 21, 2006

1 This

work was performed under a seed grant from the University of Washington’s Center for Statistics in the Social Sciences (CSSS). The authors thank
A. Roth for providing the Roth et al. (1991) dataset, and S. Sirakaya for useful
discussion.

Abstract
In hierarchical-design experiments researchers need to test for nested effects, but sometimes parametric assumptions are violated. We show that
the Kruskal-Wallis (K-W) rank test can be extended to test for such effects.
Let B = b1 . . . bh be the tested effect, and A = a1 . . . ag be the effect immediately above it in the hierarchy. If one calculates separate K-W statistics
for the effect B at each level of A, then under H0 for B, the sum of all these
statistics is asymptotically χ2h−g . This test is demonstrated using a wellknown experimental economics dataset. We also show that the Friedman
test can be extended in a similar fashion for designs that are both nested
and crossed. In general, the preferable inference approach is using the label
permutation distribution rather than the asymptotic distribution. Codes for
carrying out such tests have been implemented and are available.

1

Introduction

The motivating application for this problem was encountered during reanalysis of a highly influential four-country economic experiment (Roth et al.,
1991). A major question of interest in this experiment was whether cultural
differences affect bargaining behavior, as judged from offers in a two-player
game called ”ultimatum game”. Three sessions were held in each of four
sites located in four different countries. In each session there were 10 rounds.
In each round, ”buyers” were paired with ”sellers” for a single game, in a
round-robin pairing. Since the data are skewed and heteroscedastic, the authors performed rank tests and concluded that there were significant country
differences in offer amounts. Upon inspecting the data we noticed that a potential nested session effect was overlooked. But even had such an effect been
originally identified, the problem is that economists and other researchers do
not have at their disposal an ’off-the-shelf’, easy to use rank test to check
whether it’s significant.
Rank tests are readily available for one-way designs (Kruskal-Wallis or
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney) and for complete balanced two-way designs (Friedman). The Friedman test can be relatively easily extended to incomplete
and/or unbalanced designs; see e.g. Mack and Skillings (1980), though this
option appears to be much less known, except among researchers specializing
in nonparametric statistics. For more complex designs or research questions,
there are generic frameworks suggesting overall formulae for tests (Akritas

1

et al., 1997; Gao and Alvo, 2005). These provide templates from which an
individual test can be derived. Our question of interest may be covered by
these frameworks, but the resulting test would be neither as simple nor as
accessible to applied researchers as the one described below.

2
2.1

Nested Kruskal-Wallis Test
Asymptotic Theory

For this article’s purpose, let a hierarchical experiment design be any design
where there is at least one effect (hereafter, the ”nested” effect), whose levels are each observed within exactly one level of the effect above it in the
hierarchy (the ”nesting” effect). The design may be purely hierarchical, i.e.,
that all effects are either nested or nesting, or it may be combined with other
types. For our discussion, Let the nested effect be B = b1 . . . bh , and one
nesting effect A = a1 . . . ag - so that h levels of B are nested within g levels of A (trivially, h > g). Please note, that the effect can be a controlled
treatment, or an uncontrollable factor, e.g. a country as in the motivating
example.
It is customary and more convenient to use two indices to denote the
P
nested levels, e.g B = bi(j) , i(j) = 1 . . . hj , j = 1 . . . g. Obviously gj=1 hj = h.
A parametric ANOVA null hypothesis for B would be µi(j) = µj ∀i, j. The
analogous Kruskal-Wallis (K-W) null hypothesis is: Fi(j) = Fj ∀i, j, where
Fi(j) is the distribution of outcomes for level bi(j) . The alternative is that
2

∃l, i, j, such that Fi(j) > Fl(j) with the ’greater than’ sign denoting stochastically greater, i.e., all quantiles of Fi(j) are greater than the corresponding
quantiles of Fl(j) .
Consider a single level of A, aj with hj levels of B, each with ni(j) obPhj
servations, and i(j)=1
ni(j) = nj . Then, under the K-W null hypothesis,
the ranks of all nj observations are i.i.d discrete uniform. Therefore for each
level of B,
√


ni(j)

nj + 1
r¯i(j) −
2



−
−−−−→
n−
i(j) → ∞ N



(nj + 1)(nj − 1)
0,
12


,

(1)

where r¯i(j) is the sample mean rank of observations for level bi(j) . Therefore,
12ni(j)
(nj + 1)nj



nj + 1
r¯i(j) −
2

2

−
−−−−→ 2
n−
i(j) → ∞ χ1 .

(2)

Summing (2) over all levels nested in aj , we obtain the ordinary K-W statistic
H (Kruskal and Wallis, 1952). Since the ranks are constrained by a constant
sum, H is asymptotically χ2hj −1 . Now under the K-W null for B as defined
above, if we take another level of A, ak , and in the absence of any effect
crossing the hierarchical structure, the ranks within ak would be independent
of the ranks within aj . Therefore, the analogous K-W statistics would be
independent across different levels of A. Therefore H (nest) , the sum of all
K-W statistics from different levels of A would have (under the K-W null)

3

the following asymptotic distribution:

H

(nest)

≡

g
X
j=1

Hj =

hj
g
X
X
j=1 i=1

12ni(j)
(nj + 1)nj



nj + 1
r¯i(j) −
2

2

−
−−−→ 2
n−
j → ∞ χh−g . (3)

The process for performing a nested K-W test is schematically illustrated
in fig. 1.

2.2

Permutation K-W Tests

While establishing asymptotic properties is intrinsically important and useful, often the K-W test is called for in a limited sample-size scenario. Moreover, in many datasets ties are common. There exists a tie correction to the
K-W statistic, but it, too, is based upon asymptotic properties. Fortunately,
the tool of label permutation tests provides an adequate solution.
We take the standard permutation test approach, focusing on a single
level of A, aj : under the K-W null for B, all ranks are uniformly distributed
and therefore all possible assignment of ranks to hj subgroups with subgroup
sizes {ni(j) }, is equally likely. This is of course true for all levels of A. Thus,
randomly generating M distinct sets of groups and subgroup labels (keeping
(nest)

the same subgroup sizes as the true ones), calculating Hm , m = 1 . . . M
n
o
(nest)
and ordering them into H(m)
provides a representative sample from the
true sampling distribution of H (nest) . Setting a significance level α, we would
(nest)

reject the K-W null hypothesis for B nested in A, if H (nest) > H(M (1−α)) .

4

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the nested K-W test. Some individual
data points are labeled; this requires a minimum of 3 indices. The K-W
statistic H is calculated separately for each level of the nesting effect A,
comparing points grouped by the nested effect B. The overall test is carried
out on the sum of all such statistics. A label permutation test for B would
involve randomly re-assigning points to the groups within each level of A
- and calculating H (nest) for each such assignment. In the data example,
effect A is country, effect B is session, and data points for the test are player
summaries.

5

2.3

Data Example

As stated in the introduction, Roth et al. (1991)’s ultimatum game experiment was designed, among other things, to test for country differences in bargaining behavior. It took place in 1989-1990, in four cities around the world:
Jerusalem (Israel and Palestinian West Bank), Tokyo (Japan), Pittsburgh
(U.S.A.) and Ljubljana (formerly Yugoslavia, nowadays Slovenia). Three
sessions were run in each city. In each session there were 10 buyers and 10
sellers, matched with each other for a round-robin game of 10 rounds.1 In
each round and for each buyer-seller encounter, buyer suggested a division
of a fixed sum of real money with the seller. If seller accepted the offer, the
division was carried out. If seller refused, neither player received any money.
All interactions were indirect and anonymous.
The authors recognized that in general there is a dependence within any
given buyer’s offers. Therefore, they used only a single value from each buyer
for inference - the round 10 offer. They also assumed that these offers are
independent of session assignment, yielding a test sample size of 116. Descriptive statistics of this sample seem to suggest significant country differences
(fig. 2).
The authors’ inference method was pairwise Mann-Whitney tests, which
yielded 3 highly significant and 2 significant pairwise differences at the 0.05
level.2 But was the independence assumption correct?
1

Due to ’no shows’, three sessions ended up having fewer players; however, the number
of rounds remained 10 in all sessions.
2
There was a fundamental error in the execution of pairwise tests: confidence levels

6

40
30
20
10

Percent of Pie Offered

50

Roth et el. 1991: Round 10 Offers by Country

Israel

Japan

USA

Yugo

Country

Figure 2: Roth et al. (1991) ”buyer” offers during the last round of play
(round 10), grouped by site (country).
7

Revisiting the experimental design and play evolution, it seems that buyers gradually adapt to seller responses and vice versa.3 Since all buyers of
a given session face the same pool of sellers, and since these pools differ
for different sessions, it makes sense to assume some intra-session dependence. Figure 3, splitting the 116 round-10 offers by session, does show
marked session-specific differences at all sites. We performed a permutation
nested K-W test for the session effect on round 10 data. H (nest) = 22.4 on 8
d.f., yielding a permutation p-value of 1.3 ∗ 10−3 (permutation sample size:
50, 000). Hence, one can safely conclude that the within-session independence
assumption was wrong. In the absence of any explicit model accounting for
the intra-session dependence, the effective sample size for testing the country
effect is the number of sessions: only 12. Subsequent testing for country differences using various session summaries (including round 6 − 10 summaries
instead of only round 10), all yield p-values greater than 0.1.4 Pairwise tests
are impossible for this sample size, and the only two-way contrast indicating
a marginally significant effect is Jerusalem vs. all other three sites. We conclude that given the significant intra-session dependence in player behavior,
a larger number of sessions needs to be designed into this type of experiment
in order to draw meaningful conclusions about the main effect.
were not adjusted for pairwise comparisons. Following a Bonferroni correction, 3 tests
(all those involving Jerusalem) are still deemed significant, while two more comparisons
involving Tokyo fail to reject the null at the 0.1 level.
3
The authors also reached this conclusion, though it wasn’t factored into their inference
procedure.
4
Analysis using intra-session dependence models was also attempted; the resulting
inference was not substantially different from the one reported here.

8

40
30
20
10

Percent of Pie Offered

50

Roth et el. 1991: Round 10 Offers by Country and Session

1.Israel

2.Israel

3.Israel

1.Japan

2.Japan

3.Japan

1.USA

2.USA

3.USA

1.Yugo

2.Yugo

3.Yugo

Session.Country

Figure 3: Roth et al. (1991) ”buyer” offers during the last round of play
(round 10), grouped by session and site (country).
9

3

Nested Friedman Test

The same logic leading to the nested K-W test can produce a nested Friedman
test. Here there would be at least one blocking effect C, crossing the A, B
hierarchical design. Even under the null hypothesis for B, ranks within each
level of A may now depend upon C. The natural solution is to perform a
separate ranking for each level of C. Within a single level of A and given a
balanced complete design, this is a simple Friedman test (Friedman, 1937).5
Using the approach of Section 2.1, since the process adjusts for C via the
separate rankings, the Friedman statistics Qj obtained for each level of A are
mutually independent. Therefore, under the null hypothesis for B the sum
of separate Friedman statistics from all levels of A would have asymptotic
properties analogous to (3) (cf. fig. 4):

(nest)

Q

≡

g
X

−−→
Qj = −
v−→
∞ χ2h−g .

(4)

j=1

If the design is incomplete or unbalanced, weighted Friedman-type statistics
as in Mack and Skillings (1980) can be used instead. Of course, a permutation
test implementation is highly recommended in any case.
In the data example above, a nested Friedman-type test can be performed
for the buyer effect nested within sessions. This yields a test statistic of 562
on 104 degrees of freedom (both asymptotic and permutation p-values are
5

Note that testing for C can still be achieved using a simple Friedman test, in spite of
the hierarchy. One needs to perform a separate ranking for each level of the nested effect
B.

10

practically zero), compared with 511 with the same d.f., using an analogous
nested K-W test, i.e., one that ignores the crossed round factor. For this
particular application, both tests yield a strongly significant effect, as was
deduced by the researchers without any formal testing. However, there may
be similar applications in other fields where the nested Friedman test may
prove useful.

4

Conclusions

The two nested rank tests described here are easily implemented and accessible to any researcher. Additionally, they possess clear asymptotic properties and are directly related to well-known standard tests. Therefore, this
should present a significant enhancement of the readily-available nonparametric toolset for the analysis of experiments with nontrivial designs.
We recommend using these tests via a permutation application. R language codes (R Development Core Team, 2005), including permutation codes
for the original non-nested K-W and Friedman tests and a generic Friedmantype formulation that allows for incomplete and unbalanced designs, are
available from the authors.

11

Figure 4: Schematic illustration of the nested Friedman test. Nested and
nesting levels are as in fig. 1, but now they are crossed with effect C (having,
say, v levels) in a complete design. If one wishes to test for C, then a
single Friedman Q statistic would suffice, which is equivalent to ranking
observations within each column, then summing ranks by row. However,
in order to test for B nested in A and assuming C can be significant, one
needs to calculate a separate Q statistic for each level of A and test their
sum. This is equivalent to ranking observations within each row (marked
with horizontal rectangles), then summing ranks by column - but doing so
separately for each array of points. Like in the K-W example, inference is
obtained by summing all separate Q statistics. A label permutation test for
B would involve randomly scrambling points in each row, within each level
of A - and calculating Q(nest) for each such assignment. In the data example,
effect A is session, effect B is ”buyer”, and effect C is round. Individual
points are single offers.

12

References
Akritas, M., Arnold, S., Brunner, E., 1997. Nonparametric hypotheses and
rank statistics for unbalanced factorial designs. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc.
92, 258–265.
Friedman, M., 1937. The use of ranks to avoid the assumption of normality
in the analysis of variance. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 32, 675–701.
Gao, X., Alvo, M., 2005. A unified nonparametric approach for unbalanced
factorial designs. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 100, 926–941.
Kruskal, W. H., Wallis, W. A., 1952. Use of ranks in one-criterion variance
analysis. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 47, 583–621.
Mack, G., Skillings, J., 1980. A friedman-type rank test for main effect in a
two-factor ANOVA. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 75, 947–951.
R Development Core Team, 2005. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria,
ISBN 3-900051-07-0.
URL http://www.R-project.org
Roth, A., Prasnikar, V., Okuno-Fujiwara, M., Zamir, S., 1991. Bargaining
and market behavior in Jerusalem, Ljubljana, Pittsburgh and Tokyo: an
experimental study. Amer.Econ.Rev. 81, 1068–1095.

13

