FAMILY DYNAMICS THROUGH CHILDHOOD:
A SIBLING MODEL OF BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS*

Lingxin Hao
Department of Sociology
Johns Hopkins University
Ross L. Matsueda
Department of Sociology
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
Center for Demography and Ecology
University of Washington

Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
University of Washington
Working Paper no. 7
April 2000

*An earlier version of this paper was presented at the annual meetings of the American
Sociological Association, Toronto, Canada, August 1997. This research was supported by a
grant to the first author from the National Institute of Child and Human Development
(R01HD34293), and a grant to the second author from the National Science Foundation (SES8911211). The opinions and conclusions stated in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent any of the funding agencies. We thank Andy Cherlin and Daphne Kuo for
helpful comments on an earlier draft. Address all correspondence to Lingxin Hao, Department of
Sociology, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N. Charles St., Baltimore, Maryland 21218.

FAMILY DYNAMICS THROUGH CHILDHOOD:
A SIBLING MODEL OF BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Abstract
This article examines mothers’ life course changes and parent-child interactions in models of
children’s behavior problems. We use an integrated framework that uses social capital theories
to conceptualize parents’ investments in their children, life course perspectives to conceptualize
the timing of mothers’ life course transitions, and child development research to specify the
effects of parenting practices on children’s behavior problems. Our models examine the timing
and duration of mothers’ poverty, single motherhood, welfare, employment, and kin coresidence
through early and middle childhood. They also specify parent-child interactions as a reciprocal
outcome of parenting and children’s behavior. To estimate the models, we use data on mothers
and children from the NLSY. To control for unobserved family heterogeneity and reciprocal
causation, we estimate fixed-effects sibling models with lagged endogenous predictors and
instrumental variables. These models make strong demands on the data, but provide strong tests
of relationships. Using this strategy, we find several robust relationships. Child behavior
problems are shaped by poverty and kin coresidence in early and middle childhood, and by
parents use of physical punishment.

FAMILY DYNAMICS THROUGH CHILDHOOD:
A SIBLING MODEL OF CHILD BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS

Sociologists have become increasingly concerned with the ways in which families shape children’s
development and overall well-being. This growth of interest has been fueled by rapid transformations in
family structure, deepening poverty among children, and the deteriorating well-being of disadvantaged
children. Children’s behavior problems, in particular, are an important aspect of child development, and
may be implicated in later adult outcomes. For example, life course research finds that early child
temper tantrums may lead to later problems in life, such as downward occupational mobility, erratic
work lives, and divorce and separation (Caspi, Elder, and Bem 1987). Child development research finds
continuity between early behavior problems and later antisocial behavior (Olweus 1979; Loeber 1982),
while criminological research finds continuity between behavior problems and later delinquency and
crime (Farrington 1986; White et al. 1990). Such offenders in turn are more likely to suffer adult
problems like joblessness, poverty, violence, and imprisonment (Nagin, Farrington, and Moffitt 1995;
Farrington 1989; Hagan 1991).
The significance of the family in the genesis of children’s behavior problems is welldocumented. Both the internal dynamics of parent-child interactions and structural relationships
involving families are implicated in the development of children. Research in child psychology has
emphasized the importance of parenting styles on the well-being and control of children. Coercive or
authoritarian control based on force, threat, or physical punishment of children tends to be ineffective in
controlling and shaping children. In contrast, inductive or authoritative control based on reasoning,
explaining, and understanding tends to be effective in shaping the lives of children (Baumrind 1978;
Boronfenbrenner 1979; Rollins and Thomas 1979). Such differences in parenting styles can have a
direct effect on child behavior problems and juvenile delinquency (Patternoster and Stouthamer-Loeber

2

1984; Patterson, Reid, and Dishion 1992). Criminological research has found that anti-social and
delinquent behavior is associated with parental rejection (or lack of attachment), as well as weak
parental supervision and involvement with the child (e.g., Hirschi 1969; Loeber and Southamer-Loeber
1986; Cernkovich and Giordano 1987).
Both child development and parent-child interactions are conditioned by social structure. This
includes both the family’s internal closure as well as the family’s ties to other institutions. The lack of
internal closure, reflected in single-motherhood, isolation from extended kin, and parents working
outside the home may impede parent-child interactions and increases problem behavior (Sampson 1987;
Matsueda and Heimer 1987; Wu and Martinson 1993; Parcel and Mengahan 1994). In addition, teenage
motherhood may increase the likelihood of developmentally disadvantaged children (Nagin, Pogarsky,
and Farrington 1997).
Families that are embedded in society have greater resources to invest in children, resulting in
quality interactions and nonproblematic behavior. Conversely, families that are isolated from the labor
market, impoverished, and stigmatized by welfare will have fewer social and material resources to invest
in their children. The result will be weaker parent-child bonds and greater behavior problems exhibited
by the children.
We use the concept of family social capital to conceptualize parent-child interactions, family
structures, and family social context. Thus, we focus on the structural relations that give rise to social
resources available for parents to invest in their children, and the different ways in which parents invest
those resources (Coleman 1988). Here we emphasize the building of trust, the exchange of information,
and the mutual obligations that develop between parents and their children. Each of these processes
inhere in structural relations. Families with both biological parents present, with strong kinship
networks, and with parents embedded in the community (through jobs, voluntary associations, and the

3

like) have structures that are conducive to building reciprocal trust, stable expectations, and strong
normative controls. Family social capital invested in children is manifested in parenting practices, or
parent-child interactions. Parents invest in their children by developing warm emotional bonds, building
strong norms with consistent, positive sanctions, and providing support. These investments can dissuade
children from problem behavior.
But families influence children’s social development through a dynamic process, which unfolds
over the life course of the child. Therefore, we follow recent theorizing in criminology and adopt a life
course framework for examining family social capital and child behavior problems (Sampson and Laub
1993; Hagan, MacMillan, and Wheaton 1996; Hagan 1997). We conceptualize parents’ life course
transitions as structural relations both within the family and between the family and other institutions.
Parental role transitions, such as movements into and out of states such as poverty, welfare, employment,
single-parenthood, and coresidence with extended kin, represent major shifts in internal closure within
the family and the embeddedness of the family in society. Moreover, not only is the transition itself
important, but the timing of that transition and the duration of the state is significant for the child
(Hogan 1978; Elder 1985). For example, chronic poverty may deplete social resources (e.g., information
about ways to dissuade children from problem behavior) and thereby impair the control of children. Or
early childhood poverty could have lasting effects on children by undermining the formation of parentchild bonds at a critical life stage.
This paper uses an integrated framework drawn from social capital theory, life course
perspectives, and child development research to examine the relationships between parental life course
transitions, parent-child interactions, and children’s behavior problems. Our models have three features
that allow us to examine important substantive and methodological issues raised by our integrated
framework.

4

First, life-course and child-development perspectives emphasize the importance of the timing of
mother’s life course transitions within the developmental stages of the child. Therefore, our models
examine whether structural sources of social capital are more consequential for child outcomes if they
are present early in childhood, are present late in childhood, or change frequently throughout childhood.
Second, child development research suggests that parenting is not a unidirectional process, but entails
contributions to interactions by children as well as parents. Therefore, our models examine effects of
parenting practices on child behavior problems while controlling for possible reverse causation. Third,
because our explanatory variables (including parental life course transitions and parent-child
interactions) are not exogenous treatments, their effects on child outcomes could be biased due to
unmeasured family factors. Therefore, we use fixed-effects models for sibling data to control for the
effects of unobserved family heterogeneity.
FAMILY SOCIAL CAPITAL AS AN INTEGRATING FRAMEWORK
Following recent research on family dynamics and children’s behavior problems (e.g., Parcel and
Menaghan 1994; Sampson and Laub 1993), we use the concept of social capital to link social structure,
mother’s life course transitions, and parent-child interactions. In developing social capital theory,
Coleman (1988) tried to integrate a sociological framework, which views “actors as socialized and
action as governed by social norms, rules, and obligations,” into a rational choice perspective that
emphasizes human capital investments. Applied to the family, human capital approaches specify a
household production function, in which the utility of parents depends not only on their own
consumption, but also on the utility of their children (Becker 1991). Parents invest time, energy, and
material resources in their children to increase their children’s well being. In return, children refrain
from undesirable behavior, acquire greater human capital, land more prestigious jobs, and accumulate
greater wealth. Thus, descendants in all generations are linked by a dynastic utility function relating

5

parents’ utility to that of their children (Becker 1991).
Social capital theories build on an individual decision-making model, but explicitly consider
social relationships in the context of social structure and organization. For Coleman (1988, 1990), the
concept of social capital captures the process by which individuals develop social relations, which, in
turn, generate resources facilitating action. Social capital inheres in social relations and takes on three
forms: (1) reciprocal obligations, expectations, and trust; (2) information that provides the basis for
rational action; and (3) norms and effective sanctions that govern behavior and, in particular, induce
action in the interest of a collectivity, like the family. Conditional on family background, the concept of
social capital features three major components—embeddedness of the family in the broader society,
internal closure within the family, and interactions between parents and children, which we call “family
social capital” (Parcels and Mengahan 1994).
Family background, reflected in human capital (parental education) and financial capital
(parental income), provides parents with resources to invest in their children. Educated parents have
greater knowledge to build supportive cognitive and emotional environments for their children, while
wealthy parents have income to invest in quality homes, safe neighborhoods, and stimulating
environments. This background conditions family dynamics and children’s developmental trajectories.
Families derive greater social and material resources when they are strongly tied to other social
institutions. Social capital, in particular, inheres in “parents’ relationships with the institutions of the
community,” including neighborhoods, labor markets, educational institutions, government, and
community (Coleman 1988, p. S113). Closure with respect to these broader structures is achieved
through closed reciprocal social relations that remain stable over time. For example, poverty and
joblessness will increase isolation from conventional institutions and increase the likelihood of residence
in disorganized, crime-ridden neighborhoods. Similarly, welfare dependency may reinforce social

6

isolation by stigmatizing parents and families. In general, structural disadvantages undermine relations
between parents and their neighbors, co-workers, and community organizations, thereby reducing social
resources available to the family. Such disadvantages may ultimately interfere with parent-child relations
directly, and indirectly by undermining internal closure in the family.
Family social capital also inheres within the structure of the family. Here, closure is achieved
when family members retain reciprocal social relations with each other. This enables parents to build
trust and obligations with each other, and impose their expectations on each other. Thus, the physical
absence of adults is a “structural deficiency in social capital” (Coleman 1988, p. 111, including families
headed by single mothers, or nuclear families with both parents working, without compensating
extended kin near the household. Incomplete nuclear family structures can be partly compensated by the
presence of kin, such as grandparents, who help rear the child (Stack 1974). Social capital is also
impeded by large sibships, which dilute the attention of parents, and the presence of step-parents which
can create conflicting expectations for children, which undermines parent-child interactions (Cherlin
1978).
Parents’ investments in their children, derived from resources inherent in structural relations,
take the form of parenting, or more precisely, parent-child interactions. For example, mothers invest in
their children by discussing personal matters and expressing high educational expectations (Coleman
1988), which translates into future financial capital and well being. Parents who pay attention to their
children, supervise them closely, and expect them to succeed are investing in their children’s social
capital, which reduces antisocial behavior (Sampson and Laub 1993; Hagan, MacMillan, and Wheaton
1996; Hagan and McCarthy 1997). Conversely, merely using coercive measures, such as physical
punishment, to control children in the short-run, may reflect a lack of investment in the long-term wellbeing of children

7

MOTHERS’ LIFE COURSE TRANSITIONS THROUGH CHILDHOOD
As noted above, family social capital is increased by closure within the family and between the family
and external social institutions. Closure, in turn, is achieved through stable reciprocal social relations.
Coleman stated these relations as static entities, stressing the structural nature of closure. In reality,
however, social relations are dynamic and evolving, which opens new puzzles for the analysis of social
capital. We draw from the literature on life course and child development to conceptualize the timing of
parents’ life course transitions through the stages of childhood. We focus on the life course changes of
mothers—the primary caretakers in most families—and consider the effects of the timing of important
life course events in creating social capital and affecting child development.
Life course perspectives emphasize that lives are interdependent and linked through time, stress
that both children and parents actively shape interaction rather than passively responding to structural
constraints, and focus on the timing and sequencing of events (Amato and Booth 1997; Elder 1985).
Important events for child development include structural transitions such as family structure, welfare,
poverty, unemployment, and kinship co-residence. This emphasis echoes family demographers’ recent
concerns about the unfolding dynamics of childhood experiences and subsequent child outcomes. Much
of this work focuses on the timing of childhood experiences of poverty. It distinguishes permanent,
chronic, persistent, recurrent, occasional, and transient forms of poverty (Ashworth et al. 1994) and
differentiates effects of childhood patterns of poverty on child outcomes (Bolger et al. 1995; Duncan et
al. 1994; McLeod and Shanahan 1993; Hao 1995). Similar work has examined histories of family
structure, distinguishing current, early, and unstable family structures, and their effects on child
outcomes (e.g., Menaghan et al. 1997; Corcoran 1995; Lichter 1997).
Wu and Martinson (1993), in particular, have lent some conceptual clarity to this literature by
applying three specific hypotheses to the timing of family structure and premarital births. Early family

8

structure corresponds to a child socialization hypothesis, in which early socialization produces
trajectories that persist through adolescence. Current family structure corresponds to a social control
hypothesis, in which close supervision dissuades adolescents from deviance. Unstable family structure
corresponds to a family change hypothesis, in which frequent changes in family structure, and the
attendant stress produced, undermines adolescent development (Wu and Martinson 1993). Following
this approach, we draw on life course and child development literatures to conceptualize the process by
which the timing of family social capital influences child outcomes.
Socialization in Early Childhood
Child development researchers emphasize socialization early in a child’s life, which spawns life course
trajectories. In the transition from infancy to early childhood, parents shift from a caretaker role to a role
of directing, shaping, and reinforcing children’s behavior (e.g., Baumrind 1978). Children acquire
language, develop cognitively, and participate in symbolic interaction with parents, which facilitates
critical early learning. Parenting consists of modeling, reinforcing, and punishing behavior. According
to this view, divorce, dependence, and joblessness may have particularly harmful effects during early
childhood, generally defined as infancy through the first five years of life (Hetherington, Cox, and Cox
1978; Wallerstein and Kelly 1980). Some research finds that parent-child separation early in a child’s
life leads to negative life course trajectories (Rutter and Quinton 1984).
From the standpoint of social capital theory, we would expect that some forms of family social
capital cumulate over time, making early child experiences critical. For example, not only are the
building of trust and the internalization of norms cumulative, but the very ability to trust and internalize
norms are likely to be acquired early in life. Therefore, structural changes in the family that disrupt
closed social relations may be particularly consequential for a child’s well-being when they occur in the
first five years of life. For example, during this period, if mothers are working outside the home, fathers

9

are absent, and grandparents are not nearby, parent-child relations will be undermined, social capital
depleted, and children’s behavior problematic. On this point, Amato and Booth (1997) found that
divorces occurring early in the child’s life had persistent negative effects on child well-being,
particularly for families experiencing marital discord, and these effects were due to a lessening of
parental support. Net of their effects on financial capital, poverty and AFDC recipiency can impede
early parent-child bonds by stigmatizing the family, widening the gap between the family and other
institutions (such as integrated neighborhoods and communities), and ultimately draining the family of
social relationships upon which to build social capital.
Social Control in Middle Childhood
During middle childhood, children begin to reason, empathize, and take the role of the other. Effective
parenting is not longer restricted to direct reinforcement and modeling, but also capitalizes on reasoning
and role taking by emphasizing systems of social relations. Parents use social approval, social
disapproval, and inductive reasoning to teach the child how to infer others’ reactions to their behavior,
and how to engage in role taking (Baumrind 1978). Moreover, as children gain a sense of self and
independence, parental supervision and involvement becomes increasingly important for social control.
Structural changes, such as divorce, welfare, and unemployment, may affect children’s social
development by impeding parents’ ability to supervise and control their children (Matsueda and Heimer
1987). Parents act as capable guardians in reducing the likelihood of antisocial behavior (Cohen and
Felson 1979).
From this view, structural changes in the closure of family relations, such as father-absence,
working mothers, and absence of extended kin will undermine normative controls and effective
sanctions and increase child behavior problems. This effect may vary by the form of problem behavior.
Social control by parents may be more effective in curtailing externalizing behaviors, such as aggression

10

and temperamental, which are easily observed and corrected, than internalizing behaviors, such as
depressive and unsociable behavior, which are more nebulous, covert, and difficult to correct.
Family Instability and Reduced Social Capital
Although Coleman (1988) stressed that structural change undermined social capital – e.g., frequent
family moves attenuate community ties – he did not specify precisely whether social capital is
undermined more by having few social relations, experiencing frequent changes in social relations, or
experiencing changes earlier in life. The life course literature offers some help here, arguing that the
precise timing of life-course transitions is less important than the total number of transitions (Wu and
Martinson 1993). More changes in structural arrangements leads to greater stress on the family, which
has negative effects on child development. We suggest that frequent changes (instability) in family
structure, employment, poverty, welfare, and kin coresidence may damage parent-child relations and
undermine family social capital, including shared values and norms, trust, expectation, and obligations
embedded in these relations. Reduced social capital, in turn, may lead to greater problem behavior
exhibited by children. Some research finds that family disruption leads to aggression, impulsivity, and
unhappiness (Hetherington 1987; Wallerstein and Kelly 1980), and repeated stressful events are
associated with negative child outcomes (Rutter 1983). In particular, Amato and Booth (1997) found
that frequent changes in marital status had negative effects on children’s later psychological well-being
by undermining parental support.
In sum, our approach emphasizes the role of post-birth social capital in child behavior problems.
From this perspective, mothers’ life-course transitions (closure in social relations) affect parent-child
interactions (family social capital). These transitions and interactions, in turn, affect the behavior
problems exhibited by the child. By taking a dynamic view, we can examine whether the effect of lifecourse transitions varies by its timing in the developmental life of a child, and whether early changes,

11

recent changes, or the absence of changes are most important for child development.
PARENT-CHILD INTERACTIONS
As noted above, from the standpoint of social capital theory, parenting is a way of investing in children.
Thus, parents build up mutual trust and obligations with their children, provide them with useful
information for their futures, and socialize their children to abide by conventional norms. This
conceptualization takes the viewpoint of the parent, relegating the child to an uninteresting or passive
actor that does not contribute to his or her own socialization. Much research, however, suggests that
children are active contributors to interactions with their parents, and an exclusive focus on parents
provides an incomplete picture and can lead to methodological problems in empirical analyses.
Research from life course and child development perspectives assume that children are active
agents who contribute to their socialization. Thus, parenting is conceptualized as a joint
accomplishment between parents and their children. Of course, parents have the power to force
compliance in children, but differences in children’s behavior can lead to differences in parental
responses (e.g., Bell 1968; Bell and Harper 1977; Patterson and Yoerger 1997). For example, children
who are difficult and temperamental may elicit more punitive responses from parents. Such interactions
can escalate into episodes of physical punishment of the child. In contrast, responsive and sociable
children may facilitate attachments to parents and more authoritarian parenting behaviors. The result
can be a spiraling process of increasingly positive or negative interactions, causing parent-child dyads to
diverge in parenting styles and children’s behaviors.
We will examine the effects of parent-child interactions on children’s behavior problems while
controlling for possible effects of children’s behavior on parenting. We examine dimensions of parentchild interactions based on the concept of social capital and the literature in child development. For
example, we hypothesize that positive parenting—praising a child, showing physical affection, and

12

saying positive things—will reduce problem behaviors by teaching children the boundaries of behavior
in a non-threatening way (Patterson et al. 1992; Baumrind 1978). In contrast, the use of physical
punishment may increase aggression by legitimizing the use of violent and aggressive behavior to solve
problems (Olweus 1980; Larzelere 1986; Straus 1991). Fathers who spend time with their children are
investing in the well-being of their children. Therefore, we hypothesize that, net of parental disciplinary
styles—children who spend more time with their fathers will exhibit fewer behavior problems.
Moreover, it may be that the kinds of activities that parents share with their children are important for
children’s adjustment. Thus, parents who invest in the cultural capital of children, such as taking them
to museums and other cultural events, will increase their prosocial behaviors and decrease their
antisocial behaviors.
DATA AND MEASURES
The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
We use data from the main file of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) and its matched
mother-child file. The NLSY is based on a national probability sample of 12,686 American youths who
were aged 14-21 in January 1979, and who have been reinterviewed annually through 1994. Of the
6,283 females sampled, 456 were originally in the military and dropped after 1985, and 901 were poor
whites and dropped after 1991. In 1994, 77 percent of the 4,480 female respondents interviewed were
mothers of at least one child.
In 1986, the NLSY began adding to the survey all children born to the NLSY females. Every
other year, the NLSY assesses the children’s development, including their behavior problems and home
environments. By 1994, five waves of assessments had been completed with the 7,089 NLSY children
and 16 waves of interviews had been completed with the 4,480 NLSY mothers. We take advantage of
this survey design to estimate sibling models that examine relationships between child behavior

13

problems and childhood experiences of poverty, single motherhood, AFDC receipt, kin support, and
parenting practices.
We confine our analysis of behavior problems to children aged 6-14 in the years of 1986, 1988,
1990, 1992, and 1994. We exclude three categories of youth for substantive reasons. First, we exclude
non-school age children because our assessments included activities both at home and in school.
Second, we exclude older teenagers because they have advanced into a different developmental stage,
one in which, for example, adolescent delinquency has replaced child behavior problems. Third, we
exclude children born prior to the beginning of the NLSY longitudinal survey (1979), because
retrospective data on mothers are incomplete.
Our sibling model places an additional requirement on our sample. Our fixed-effects sibling
model requires data on at least two siblings in a family; therefore, we exclude families with only one
child observed. In our sibling model, we choose one observation per child using a criterion that
maximizes the difference in childhood experience of mothers’ life course transitions. For example, in a
two-child family, we choose the earliest observation of the older child and the latest observation of the
younger child. This strategy yields greater within-family variance for variables describing childhood
experiences of mothers’ life-course transitions, which is important for obtaining stable estimates of
sibling models.1 The resulting sample of children with valid behavior problem assessments includes
4,351 children born to 1,805 mothers. Among the 1,805 mothers, 1,236 had two children, 431 had three
children and 138 had more than three children included in our sample.
Measurement
Behavior Problems. Since 1986, the NLSY has administered to mothers a checklist of their children’s
1

We also estimated models in which we randomly selected the measure of child behavior problems at one wave. This
sampling method drops the within-family variance. Sensitivity analyses find that this way of sampling yields estimates that
are identical in sign, but smaller in magnitude and statistical significance.

14

behavior problems derived from the Achenbach Behavior Problems Checklist (Achenbach and
Edelbrock 1981). We specified two confirmatory factor models, one with a single latent construct and
the other with two latent constructs—externalizing and internalizing symptoms (see Appendix Table 1
for items of the two-factor model).2 These specifications were derived from Achenbach and Edelbrock’s
(1981) original analysis, as well as the analyses of Zill (1985) using the National Health Interview
Survey, Parcel and Menaghan (1988) and McLeod and Shanahan (1993) using the 1986 assessment of
the NLSY children, and Lizotte et al. (1992) using data from the Pittsburgh and Rochester Youth
Surveys. Both one-factor and two-factor structures appear consistent with earlier research, theoretical
considerations, and psychological diagnostic classifications. Each of the models provides a reasonable
fit to the data and exhibit reasonable factor loading. The discriminant validity of the factors, as revealed
by the inter-factor correlations, is less apparent. In our two-factor model, internalizing and externalizing
factors are correlated .84 (.70 after computing factor scores). Although discriminant validity is not
strong, we follow research in child psychology and report the full results for the single factor and
internalizing vs. externalizing. Our composites are factor scores using weights from our confirmatory
factor models, which give more weight to indicators that have greater reliability.3
At-Birth Conditions. We measure several variables at the time of birth of a given child. Teenage
motherhood refers to a woman who gave birth to her first child while she was a teenager. It is invariant
across siblings. However, teenage childbearing (maternal age at birth of each child) varies between
siblings. Other variables measured at birth of the child are static measures that vary between siblings.
These include mother’s educational level and family income at birth of each child, indicating the human

2

The behavior problem checklist for 1986 has four fewer items. Therefore, we estimated separate confirmatory factor models
for the 1986 data, and computed separate factor scores for 1986.
3
Detailed results from the confirmatory factor analysis are available from the authors upon request.
4
We also examine a more detailed classification of family structure, distinguishing stepfamilies and cohabitation from single
status. Multivariate analyses reveal that neither detailed nor simple family structure explains children’s

15

and financial capital available in the family when the child was born. Mothers’ smoking and drinking
during pregnancy captures prenatal health conditions that may affect fetal development. Some
psychological research suggests that prenatal substance use can lead to child behavior problems. An
alternative argument, however, suggests that rather than the substances per se, it is a mother’s propensity
of risk-taking and self-destruction (reflected in drinking and smoking during pregnancy) that influences a
child’s behavior problems. Our sibling model controls for mother-specific heterogeneity (including her
propensity for risk-taking and self-destruction), and therefore, can test these competing hypotheses.
Childhood Experiences of Mother’s Life-course Transitions. During a child’s life course,
parents’ demographic and socioeconomic status changes, which changes their potential for investment in
their children. We measure childhood experiences of mother’s life-course transitions using four
dimension—family structure, grandparent co-residence, AFDC participation, and poverty. For family
structure, we focus on intact family.4 Intact family structure is defined from each child’s perspective. If
the child lives with both biological father and mother, we define it as an intact family for the child. Such
defined, intact family structure may differ across siblings: an intact family for the younger sibling can be
a stepfamily for the older sibling. Grandparents’ coresidence is defined as the mother and child living in
grandparents’ home. If the mother received AFDC payments in a year, we consider her as an AFDC
participant. When the family income falls below the poverty line, the family is called living in poverty.
Because different siblings grow up in different life stages of their parents, their experiences of
parental life-course transitions may differ. Thus, we want to examine hypotheses corresponding to the
timing of parental life-course transitions with respect to each child. We modify the approach of Wu and
Martinson (1993) to arrive at two conceptualizations of the life-course timing and duration of family

4

We also examine a more detailed classification of family structure, distinguishing stepfamilies and cohabitation from single
status. Multivariate analyses reveal that neither detailed nor simple family structure explains children’s behavior problems.
Therefore we use the simple classification in the analysis.

16

structure, grandparent co-residence, AFDC participation, and poverty. To illustrate the two
conceptualizations, we use the example of poverty.
The first conceptualization of poverty captures early childhood exposure (0-5 years) with the
cumulative duration of the first six years the child spent in poverty (see Wu and Martinson 1993, p. 216).
The second conceptualization captures recent continuous duration in poverty.5 We are extending Wu
and Martinson (1993), who found no support for a snapshot of current poverty status. We hypothesize
that it is not merely a snapshot of current poverty status, but rather duration in current poverty status that
will affect child behavior problems from a social control view. Current duration captures the stability of
the current poverty status and equivalently controls for the instability of family financial situation.
Parenting Practices. The NLSY administered a short form of the Home Observation
Measurement of the Environment (HOME). Previous research assumes HOME is a unidimensional
construct capturing the home environment. We will deconstruct the index and examine whether distinct
sub-dimensions affect behavior problems distinctly. We draw upon theories of child psychology,
previous operationalizations of parenting, and the substantive meanings of the HOME items to specify
five major dimensions of parenting. The dimensions are mother’s positive parenting, physical
punishment (spanking), taking the child to cultural activities, father’s time spent with the child, and
home reading activities. We estimated a confirmatory factor model, tested its goodness of fit, and then
computed factor scores for each construct. Positive parenting is measured with a composite of three
items, including the number of times a parent praised a child, showed physical affection, and said
positive things. The spanking item is measured on an interval scale, which we truncated at eight to
reduce the potential influence of outliers (0.6% of children experienced spanking greater than 8 times in

5

Preliminary analyses found empirical support for this specification. Models that interacted current life-course status with
duration in that status provided a better fit to the data than models that used only current status.

17

a week). Cultural activities include taking children to museums and performance. Time the father spent
with the child is based on spending time and having meals and outdoor activities with the child. Home
reading activities include children’s own reading and mothers’ reading to children.
SPECIFICATION OF THE MODELS
Our empirical examination of parental life course transitions, parent-child interactions, and child
outcomes raises a number of substantive and methodological issues. Our analyses proceed in two steps.
First, we examine the effects of family background and parental life course transitions on child behavior
problems. Second, we examine the effects of parenting on child behavior problems, controlling for
family background and parental life course transitions.
Models of Family Background and Parental Life Course Transitions
Our models of family background and parental life course transitions raise the question of how best to
control for family background, including both measured and unmeasured family characteristics. Model I
will be of the following form. Let yijt be one of the measures (scalers) of behavior problems for child j in
family i, assessed at time t. Xijt is a vector of the child’s characteristics as controls (age, gender, birth
order, health condition, age of the youngest child, and the number of siblings at home at the time of
assessment). The vector Bij denotes at-birth conditions, including the ith mother’s age at birth of the
child (young teen, old teen vs. adulthood) and financial, human, and health resources at birth of the jth
child. We use Cijt to denote a vector of variables describing childhood exposure to parents’ life course
transitions up to time t, the year of assessment. A model that controls for observed family background is
a standard regression model that can be estimated with OLS.6

(1)

6

y ijt = ß1' X ijt + ß 2 ' Bij + ß 3' C ijt + u ijt

We use the subscript t to indicate that siblings were assessed in different years. In later specifications, it also helps indicate
lagged variables. The data structure used for analysis is one record per child.

18

This model regresses child behavior problems on the child’s characteristics, at-birth conditions, and
parental life course transitions. Because it excludes endogenous variables representing parent-child
interactions, this is a reduced-form of our complete model, providing total effects of exogenous variables
on behavior problems.
The OLS model, however, fails to disentangle between-family error variance from within-family
error variance. A random effects (RE) model, which estimates unobserved family heterogeneity, a i,
under the assumption that a i is orthogonal to other regressors that vary across siblings (Bijt, and Cijt):

(2)

yijt = ß1' X ijt + ß 2' Bij + ß 3' C ijt + α i + u ijt .

If the variance of a i is non-zero, then the RE model estimated by GLS will provide more efficient
estimates than OLS.
If, however, unobserved family heterogeneity is correlated with other regressors, then OLS and
GLS will yield biased and inconsistent estimates of parameters. We expect that such heterogeneity (such
as unmeasured parent characteristics, parents’ own socialization history in their families of origin, and
parents’ child rearing strategies) would be correlated with childhood experiences that vary across
siblings (such as parental life course transitions and parent-child interactions). Therefore, we specify a
fixed-effects model that relaxes the orthogonality assumption (Hsiao 1986). We can estimate the model
using the following equation that differences out both observed and unobserved family heterogeneity:

(3) y ijt − y i = ß 1' ( X ijt − X i ) + ß 2' ( B ij − B i ) + ß 3' (C ijt − Ci )+uijt − ui

Fixed-effects models also control for persistent measurement errors in mothers’ reports on child
behavior problems—such persistent errors are absorbed in our unobserved family heterogeneity
component. To test the RE hypothesis that a i is orthogonal to other regressors, which obviates the need
for FE, we use a Hausman test (Greene 1993).

19

The comparison of the OLS, RE and FE estimates can shed some light to our understanding of
the fixed effects models. While OLS and RE estimator make use of both between and within family
variations, FE estimator differences out all between-family variation. Between-family variation includes
three components: (1) observed family fixed variables, such as parents’ education; (2) the betweenfamily portion of observed variables that can vary between and within families, such as childhood
experience; and (3) unobserved family-specific heterogeneity in the family of origin and procreation
common to a sibship.7 We also use the OLS, RE, and FE models in examining effects of parenting
practices on child behavior problems.
Models of Parenting Practices
Our models of parent-child interactions, add parenting practices, Pijt, to the model of background
characteristics and mother’s life course transitions (making the latter model a reduced form). This gives
us Model II:
(4) y ijt = ß 1' X ijt + ß 2' B ij + ß 3' C ijt + ß 4' P ijt + α i + uijt .

As noted above, however, child development researchers suggest that children contribute to their own
development by eliciting parental responses. Therefore, parenting and child behavior problems may be
reciprocally related. Any examination of parenting on child behavior problems must control for possible
correlation between Pijt and uijt produced through reciprocal causation. The fixed effects, a i, helps to
reduce the correlation between parenting and the error term but does not solve the problem completely.
Therefore, assuming that current child behavior problems cannot influence past parenting, we substitute
lagged parenting for current parenting in Model III:

7

Because the estimates of our fixed-effects model are conditional on the sample in that a i are treated as fixed (and
estimable) rather than random and drawn from a probability distribution, we are limited in our ability to make out-of-sample
predictions beyond the sample values of a i (Chamberlain 1982).

20

(5)

y ijt = ß1' X ijt + ß 2 ' Bij + ß 3' C ijt + ß 4 ' Pij, t-1 + α i + u ijt .
However, a further problem arises. Past parenting can affect past behavior problems, which, in

turn, produces current behavior problems (state dependence). In other words, past parenting is
confounded with state dependence in the dependent variable. To disentangle lagged parenting from state
dependence in behavior problems, we control for lagged behavior problems. This may result in biases
due to correlations between endogenous predictors and disturbances – most commonly from serial
correlation in the presence of a lagged dependent variable. Therefore, we use an instrumental variables
(IV) estimator, using the second-order lagged behavior problems as an instrument of the first-order
lagged predictor (Hsiao 1986). Model IV specifies a clear temporal ordering between parenting and
behavior problems and separates the state dependence of behavior problems from the causal effect of
parenting:
(6)

y ijt = ß1' X ijt + ß 2 ' Bij + ß 3' C ijt + ß 4 ' Pij, t-1+? yˆ ij ,t −1 + α i + u ijt .

This model, using a FE estimator to control for unobserved heterogeneity, lagged endogenous predictors
to control for state dependence, and an IV estimator to control for serial correlation in the presence of a
lagged dependent variable, provides a very strong test of our hypotheses. At the same time, however, it
makes great demands on the data, and therefore, we will compare it with our other models, which make
fewer demands.
RESULTS
Table 1 describes the distribution of variables used to estimate our reduced form model, Model I. The
three measures of behavior problems are standardized to unit variances. The age of children ranged
between 6-14 years of age, with a mean of 8. About half the children are boys, one-third are first born,
and the mean level of poor health is .22 on a 6-point scale. The average size of a sibship is just under

21

three children, with the youngest child averaging five years of age.
(Table 1 about here)
Although 19% of the children had mothers who had given birth to at least one child before age
18 (teenage motherhood), only 3% of the children had themselves been born to a mother under 18. The
mothers in our sample are relatively disadvantaged: their average family income (at the time of birth of
the child) was about $20,590 and their average educational level was less than 12 years. Nine percent of
the mothers drank during pregnancy and 8% smoked. Thus, at the time of birth, children faced relatively
disadvantaged home environments. These disadvantages persisted through childhood. For example, on
average, children spent only 3.8 years in intact families but 2.1 years in poverty out of their first six
years. Only 54% of the children spent their childhood (up until the year of assessment between ages 614) in intact families while 31% of them were currently living in poverty at time of assessment. Among
those living in poverty currently, the average duration is 5.8 years (not shown in the table).
The use of sibling data to control for unobserved family heterogeneity requires that variables
used in the analysis exhibit sufficient variation within families. Greater percentages of variance within
families allow more precise estimates of the fixed-effects model. We take caution in interpreting results
for variables with low percentages of within-family variation because coefficients may be estimated with
large sampling variability. The last column of Table 1 presents within-family variance of each variable
as a percentage of total variance. The percentage of within-family variance for internalizing and
externalizing symptoms is more than 40%, whereas for overall behavior problems, it is slightly lower.
The percentage of within-family variance for the right-hand-side variables ranges from 3.5% for
mother’s education at birth to 84.3% for the first-born. Variables with substantial within-family
variance (30% and above) include most of the child characteristics and the conditions at-birth.
Childhood exposure to parents’ life course transitions varies moderately (8.4-46%) within families and

22

parenting varies between 32-46%.
Parents’ Characteristics, Child Characteristics and Conditions at Birth
Turning to our multivariate substantive models, Table 2 presents the OLS, RE, and FE estimates
of Model I. The dependent variables are standardized, so we can compare the relative magnitudes of
effects across equations. The bottom of the table shows the p-valued of the Hausman tests, indicating
that we can reject the null hypothesis that unobserved family heterogeneity is orthogonal to siblingvarying regressors. Thus, FE estimates are consistent, while OLS and RE are not. The R2s of the FE
estimator refer to the percentage of within-family variance in behavior problems explained by
explanatory variables. The R2s of the RE estimator are the weighted sums of within and between R2s.
Finally, the OLS R2s are unweighted sums. Overall, the R2s of our models are moderate in size (.06.10), similar or somewhat larger than previous research using these data on individuals (e.g., Parcel and
Menaghan 1993, 1994). In addition, the FE R2s are not substantially different from those of OLS or RE.
(Table 2 about here)
The effects of parents’ characteristics are estimated using OLS and RE but not FE. In fixed effects
models, parents’ characteristics are identical for siblings, and therefore, are differenced out of the
estimation equations. That is we control for both observed and unobserved heterogeneity, but do not
estimate these effects. Nevertheless, in OLS and RE models, these variables do not appear to be
decisive for child behavior problems.
Examining the effects of child characteristics, we find that, as expected, sex is an important
predictor of behavior problems: boys engage in more behavior problems than girls. As expected, the
effect of sex is particularly strong for externalizing behaviors. Results across the three estimators are
consistent in both magnitude and significance. A similar consistency emerges for the strong and
detrimental effect of poor health on behavior problems. Effects of other child characteristics are less

23

consistent. For example, age significantly reduces internalizing symptoms for models estimated by OLS
and RE, but not FE. Number of siblings and age of youngest sibling reduce overall behavior problems
using the FE and RE estimators, but do not affect the specific internalizing and externalizing symptoms
taken separately.
With one exception, the effects of variables measured at birth fail to survive controls for
unobserved heterogeneity. The exception is teenage childbearing, which significantly reduces
internalizing symptoms for each of the three estimators. Thus, net of our measures of family
disadvantages, teenage childbearing actually exerts a positive effect on internalizing symptoms. The
significant effect of teenage childbearing on externalizing symptoms using OLS, however, does not
survive controls for unobserved heterogeneity. Similarly, the effects of drinking and smoking during
pregnancy disappear in the fixed-effects model. In these cases, we cannot rule out the possibility that the
effects are spurious, due to unobserved family heterogeneity. Stable characteristics – such as mothers’
personalities – may lead her to smoke and drink during pregnancy, and also cause her children to exhibit
problem behavior.
Mothers’ Life-Course Transitions
Childhood experiences of mothers’ life-course transitions reflect the family’s internal closure (family
structure and grandparent coresidence) and the family’s external embeddedness in broader social
structures (poverty and AFDC), and thus, provide structural conditions for social capital. For instance,
poverty reflects material deprivation as well as isolation from mainstream society. AFDC brings in
payments from the government but at the same time produces social stigma and isolation. Intact families
and grandparents residing in the home create closure of interpersonal relationships in the family. We are
also interested in the timing of these transitions in the development of the child, which correspond to
developmental (early in life), social control (recently), and stress hypotheses (unstable).

24

Overall, we find support for the developmental hypothesis for early child experiences of
grandparent coresidence and poverty. Children who lived with their grandparents early in life exhibited
fewer internalizing and externalizing symptoms. This result holds when controlling for unobserved
family heterogeneity and family structure. Interestingly, intact families do not exert significant effects
on behavior problems, regardless of their timing. Early child exposure to poverty increases all three
indexes of behavior problems, even when controlling for unobserved heterogeneity in the FE models.
This finding is consistent with that of Duncan et al. (1994) and supports the developmental hypothesis
that early child experiences of deprivation have a persistent effect on outcomes even when controlling
for recent deprivation or changes in deprivation.
We find little support for a social control view, in which recent experiences of mother’s life
course transitions affect behavior problems. Indeed, only current poverty affects externalizing and
overall behavior problems, but this effect, significant in OLS and RE models, does not survive control
for unobserved heterogeneity in the fixed-effects model. Thus, we cannot rule out the possibility that the
effects are spurious due to unmeasured stable family effects. The same holds for unstable poverty,
which exerts significant effects on externalizing and overall behavior problems in OLS and RE models,
but not FE models. In general, we find little support for the family change hypothesis, which argues that
unstable family social capital undermines the well being of children.
In sum, while we fail to find support for the effects of family structure and AFDC at any stage of
child development, we do find support for the developmental hypothesis that early childhood
experiences of deprivation (poverty) and social support (grandparent living in the home) will influence
later behavior problems. Thus, closure and embeddedness that occurs early in a child’s life facilitates
socialization and reduces later behavior problems. Controlling for these early experiences, recent
closure does not substantially increase social control over their children. Social control may rest less on

25

current closure and more on actual parenting practices, to which we now turn.
Parenting Practices
We conceptualize parenting practices as a form of investment in child development. We hypothesize
that parents who invest in their children by refraining from physical punishment, taking an active interest
in their lives, and praising them for positive behavior will have children with fewer behavior problems.
We estimated Model II using equation (4), and reported the results for parenting variables in Table 3.
We find that physical punishment exhibits a robust and significant effect on each of our three measures
of behavior problems for all three estimators. As predicted, physical punishment has a particularly
strong effect on externalizing behaviors (50% greater than that on internalizing). Children who are
spanked eight times a week score more than a standard deviation higher on behavior problems than those
who are not spanked. Moreover, this effect persists even when controlling for unobserved family
heterogeneity in the fixed-effects model. Thus, we can rule out the possibility that the deleterious effect
of physical punishment is spurious due to stable parent or family characteristics.
Cultural activities also exhibit significant effects on all three measures of behavior problems,
which survives controls for family heterogeneity in the fixed-effects model. Children who are taken to
museums and performances by their parents show fewer behavior problems. Reading activities
significantly reduce externalizing symptoms and overall behavior problems, controlling for family
heterogeneity. For internalizing symptoms, however, the effect becomes statistically indistinguishable
from zero in the fixed-effects model. Positive parenting significantly reduces all three measures of
behavior problems when estimated by OLS and RE, but not FE. Therefore, we cannot rule out the
possibility that the effect is spurious due to omitted stable family factors. Similarly, father’s time spent
with children reduces internalizing and overall behavior problems when estimated by RE, but becomes
nonsignificant when controlling for family heterogeneity in the FE model.

26

(Table 3 about here)
The parenting effects in Table 3, however, are subject to possible bias due to reciprocal causality.
Increases in spanking can be a response to children’s aggressive behavior and greater shared activities
can be a result of children’s good behavior. We turn to Model III (equation 5) which specifies lagged
parenting rather than current parenting. Model III places greater demands on the data because two
consecutive observations for each sibling must be available to estimate lagged effects. This reduces the
sample size to 1,326 families with 3,107 children, which results in smaller within-family variation and
reduced power of statistical tests. Using this smaller sample, we estimated Model III and reported the
results for parenting variables in Table 4.
(Table 4 about here)
The deleterious effect of spanking is again robust across all measures of behavior problems and
all estimators. The magnitude of the lagged effect is slightly smaller. For example, for our FE estimate
for externalizing, the standardized coefficient of current spanking was .194, while the corresponding
estimate of lagged spanking is .135 (not shown in the table). The smaller coefficient in lagged models
could reflect the long length of lag–two years, which is the time between child assessments in the NLSY.
Conceivably a shorter lag could produce a stronger estimate. The effect of reading activities, which was
significant for externalizing and overall problems using all three estimators, now is substantially reduced
in the FE model and no longer significant. Thus, we cannot rule out the possibility that this effect is
spurious due both to family heterogeneity and reciprocal causality. That, of course, assumes that the
two-year lag is correct.
Although Model III specifies a temporal ordering between parenting and behavior problems that
coincides with the assumed causal ordering, it does not disentangle lagged parenting from lagged
behavior problems, which likely predict current behavior problems. Thus, the effects of lagged

27

parenting could be confounded with state dependence in behavior problems. Model IV, specified in
equation (6), addresses this problem by controlling for lagged behavior problems. To overcome possible
biases due to correlations between parenting and behavior problems (arising through serial correlation in
the presence of a lagged dependent variable, we use an instrumental variables (IV) estimator, using
second-order lagged behavior problems as an instrument for first-order lagged behavior problems. This
strategy requires three consecutive observations for each sibling, reducing the sample to 905 families
with 2,051 children. Power of tests and within-family variation are further reduced in estimates of
Model IV, which are presented in Table 5.
(Table 5 about here)
As expected, behavior problems show remarkable continuity, particularly for OLS and RE
models (standardized coefficients about .80), which leads to substantially larger R2s. The FE estimates
are substantially lower—.24 for internalizing symptoms, .53 for externalizing, and .41 for overall
problems. This implies that much of the state dependence in child behavior problems is actually due to
unobserved family heterogeneity. Such heterogeneity accounts for 70% of continuity for internalizing,
36% for externalizing, and 50% for overall problems. Again, the Hausman test rejects the null
hypothesis of orthogonality specified in the RE model.
But what effect does controlling for state dependence have on our substantive parameter
estimates? After separating out the effect of the lagged predicted dependent variable, the effect of
spanking effect is still significant for all three estimators and for all three outcomes, internalizing,
externalizing, and overall problems. In some cases, the coefficients are somewhat smaller. For
example, for externalizing problems, the standardized coefficient of lagged spanking is reduced from
.135 to .083 when controlling for continuity in behavior problems. Thus, the significant effect of
spanking persists across all of our models, after controlling for unobserved family heterogeneity,

28

specifying a two-year lagged effect, and controlling for state dependence. In contrast, the effects of
positive parenting disappear for all three estimators and all three outcomes when controlling for state
dependence. As in the earlier models, father’s time with the child and the home reading activities
significantly affect some behavior problems using OLS and RE, but do not survive controls for
unobserved family heterogeneity in the FE model.
CONCLUSIONS
This article has examined a model of children’s behavior problems that draws upon social capital theory,
life course perspectives, and child development research. Our findings suggest three important
conclusions. First, we find that, among our measures of family closure and embeddedness—including
poverty, single mothers, welfare, and kin coresidence—exposure to poverty and kin coresidence in early
childhood significantly affects child behavior problems. The effect of kin coresidence is consistent with
ethnographic studies of the family (Stack 1974). Moreover, the effect of poverty is consistent with other
research emphasizing the role of poverty (Lichter 1997; Corcoran 1995; Duncan et al. 1994), and
suggests that policies designed to ameliorate poverty may be more effective in improving child
development. We argued that poverty reflects a family’s lack of embeddedness in broader social
structures, including neighborhoods and communities. But it also reflects the absence of financial
capital available to the family. Our models partial out financial capital at birth of the child, and
therefore, the effects of poverty in early childhood capture primarily social capital, whereas poverty in
middle childhood captures social capital and certain changes in financial capital in middle childhood.
Second, decomposing the HOME index into separate dimensions is illuminating. Among our
parenting variables, physical punishment exerts a strong and significant effect on behavior problems.
This finding is consistent with previous research examining negative effects of physical punishment
(e.g., Straus 1991), but provides much stronger support given that our models have controlled for

29

unobserved family heterogeneity, reverse causality, and endogeneity. More generally, this finding
illustrates the complexity of theorizing about social capital investments. Parents’ spanking of their
children may put an end to immediate behavior difficulties—such as crying or acting out—but have a
long-term negative effect on other more important behavior problems. Future research is needed to
apply the same rigorous statistical models to other dimensions of parenting identified in the child
development literature. For example, are problem behaviors exacerbated by the pure use of physical
punishment or the anger and authoritarianism of the parent that usually accompanies spanking? Beyond
physical punishment, does inductive reasoning reduce the likelihood of children’s behavior problems
more effectively than strict enforcement of rules (Baumrind 1978)?
Third, using a sibling model to control for unobserved family heterogeneity, we fail to find
support for the hypothesis that children born to teenage mothers are developmentally disadvantaged. In
fact, we find that, net of our observed covariates measuring structural disadvantage, teen childbearing
may have a positive effect on internalizing symptoms. This is consistent with Geronimous et al.’s
(1992) finding using cousin models, but inconsistent with individual-level analyses of Nagin et al.
(1997). The observed negative association between teenage motherhood and child development appears
to result from teenage mothers being disproportionately drawn from disadvantaged backgrounds.
Our empirical results did not provide evidence to support the predicted effects of other indicators
of family social capital, including structural conditions described by family structure and AFDC
participation, as well as parents’ social capital investments described by positive parenting. This is due
in part because of the strength of our statistical models, which control for unobserved family
heterogeneity with fixed effects, reciprocal causation with lagged effects, and endogeneity with
instrumental variables, and thereby come closer to approximating a controlled experiment than previous
studies. Such models make great demands on the data, and future research using larger samples and

30

designs that increase within-family variance on predictors is needed to rule out these effects definitively.
But perhaps more importantly, our measures of family social capital—although they follow
closely from the logic and illustrative empirical work of Coleman (1988) –nevertheless use relatively
standard measures of family processes. Additional theoretical and empirical work is needed to specify
the precise social capital investments relevant to child development. Theoretically, we need to specify
the exact mechanisms by which structural relations translate into family social capital. For example, are
weak ties with important information more important than strong ties with weak information? How does
this trade-off vary by outcomes—that is, by specific returns? Empirically, we need to identify stronger
measures of family social capital. Measures of social relations should take into account the composition
of networks, the characteristics of network members, and the actual interactions between network
members. Moreover, the precise nature of important information transmitted needs to be specified.
Future research can extend these analyses to examine issues we have been unable to address
fully. First, the longitudinal data on children’s behavior problems will allow us to examine the dynamics
of children’s behavior problems within the developmental course of the child. Such data would also
allow one to control for unobserved heterogeneity both between families and between individual
children. Second, covariance structure models would allow one to model dynamic processes in which
parents make decisions about investment in children. Here one could develop a model in which the
behavior problems of the first-born would influence parents’ decision concerning social capital
investment in subsequent children. In this way, between-children outcomes would be dynamically
interrelated (e.g., Becker 1991; Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1995).

31

REFERENCES
Achenbach, Thomas. M. and C. Edelbrock. 1981. Behavior Problems and Competencies Reported by
Parents of Normal and Disturbed Children Aged Four Through Sixteen. Monographs of Society
for Research in Child Development, serial No. 188, Vol. 46.
Ashworth, K., M. Hill, and R. Walker. 1994. “Patterns of childhood poverty: New challenges
for policy.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 13(4):658-680.
Amato, Paul R., and Alan Booth. 1997. A Generation at Risk: Growing Up in an Era of Family
Upheaval. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Baumrind, Diana. 1978. “Parental Disciplinary Patterns and Social Competence in Children.” Youth
and Society 9:239-76.
Becker, Gary S. 1991. A Treatise on the Family. Enlarged Edition. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Bell, Richard Q. 1968. “A Reinterpretation of the Direction of Effects in Studies of Socialization.”
Psychological Review 75:81-95.
Bell, Richard Q., and Lawrence V. Harper. 1977. Child Effects on Adults. Hillsdale, N.J.:L. Erlbaum
Associates.
Bolger, Kerry E., Charlotte J. Patterson, William W. Thompson. 1995. “Psychosocial Adjustment among
Children Experiencing Persistent and Intermittent Family Economic Hardship.” Child
Development 66:1107-29.
Bronfenbrenner, U. 1979. The Ecology of Human Development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Caspi, Avshalom, Glen H. Elder, Jr., and Daryl J. Bem. 1987. “Moving Against the World: LifeCourse Patterns of Explosive Children.” Developmental Psychology 23: 308-13.

32

Cernkovich, Steven A., and Peggy C. Giordano. 1987. “Family Relationships and Delinquency.”
Criminology 25:295-322.
Chamberlain, G. 1982. “Multivariate Regression Models for Panel Data.” Journal of
Econometrics 18:5-46.
Cherlin, Andrew J. 1978. “Remarriage as an Incomplete Institution.” American Journal of
Sociology 84:634-50.
Cohen Lawrence E., and Marcus Felson. 1979. “Social Change and Crime Rate Trends: A Routine
Activity Approach.” American Sociological Review 44:588-608.
Coleman, James S. 1988. “Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital.” American Journal of
Sociology 94:S95-S120.
________. 1990. Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Corcoran, M. 1995. “Rags to rags: Poverty and mobility in the United States.” Annual Review
of Sociology 21:237-256.
Duncan, Greg, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Pamela K. Klebanov. 1994. “Economic Deprivation and
Early-Childhood Development.” Child Development 65:296-318.
Elder, Glen H., Jr. 1985. “Perspectives on the Life Course.” In Glen H. Elder, Jr., ed., Life Course
Dynamics, pp. 23-49. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Farrington, David P. 1986. “Stepping Stones to Adult Criminal Careers.” Pp. 359-384 in Development
of Antisocial and Prosocial Behavior, edited by D. Olweus, J. Block and M. Radke-Yarrow.
New York: Academic Press.
________. 1989. “Later Adult Life Outcomes of Offenders and Nonoffenders.” Pp. 220-244 in Children
at Risk: Assessment, Longitudinal Research, and Intervention, edited by M. Brambring, F. Losel,
and H. Skowronek. New York: Walter de Gruyter.

33

Geronimus, Arline T. and Sanders Korenman. 1992. “The Socio-economic Consequences of
Teen Childbearing Reconsidered.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107:1187-1214.
Greene, William H. 1993. Econometric Analysis. 2nd Edition. New York: Macmillan
Publishing.
Hagan, John. 1991. “Destiny and Drift: The Risks and Rewards of Youth.” American Sociological
Review 56:567-82.
Hagan, John, Ross MacMillan, and Blair Wheaton. 1996. “The Life Course Effects of Family Migration
on Children.” American Sociological Review 61:347-367.
Hagan, John. 1997. “Crime and Capitalization: Toward a Developmental Theory of Street Crime in
America.” Pp. 287-308 in Advances in Criminological Theory, Vol. 7: Developmental Theories
of Crime and Delinquency, edited by T.P. Thornberry. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Hagan, John and Bill McCarthy. 1997. Mean Streets: Youth Crime and Homelessness. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Hao, Lingxin. 1995. “Poverty, Public Assistance, and Children in Intact and Single-Mother
Families.” Journal of Family and Economic Issues 16 (2/3):181-205.
Hetherington, E. Mavis, M. Cox, and R. Cox. 1978. “The Aftermath of Divorce.” In J. J. Stevens, Jr.
and M. Matthews eds. Mother-Child, Father-Child Relationship. National Association for the
education of Young Children, Washington DC.
Hetherington, E. Mavis. 1987. "Family Relations Six Years After Divorce." Pp. 185-205 Remarriage
and Stepparenting: Current Research and Theory, edited by K. Pasley and M. Ihinger-Tallman.
Hirschi, Travis. 1969. Causes of Delinquency. Berkeley: Free Press.
Hogan, Dennis P. 1978. The variable order of events in the life course. American Sociological Review
43:573-86.

34

Hsiao, Cheng. 1986. Analysis of Panel Data. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Larzelere, Robert E. 1986. “Moderate Spanking: Model or Deterrent of Children’s Aggression in the
Family?” Journal of Family Violence 1:27-36.
Litchter, D. T. 1997. “Poverty and inequality among children.” Annual Review of Sociology
23:121-145.
Lizotte, Alan J., Deborah J. Chard-Wierschem, Rolf Loeber, and Susan B. Stern. 1992. “A Shortened
Child Behavior Checklist for Delinquency Studies.” Journal of Quantitative Criminology 8:23345.
Loeber, Rolph. 1982. “The Stability of Antisocial and Delinquent Child Behavior: A Review.”
Psychological Bulletin 94:68-99.
Loeber, Rolph, and Magda Stouthamer-Loeber. 1986. “Family Factors as Correlates and Predictors of
Juvenile Conduct, Problems and Delinquency.” Pp. 29-149 in Crime and Justice: An Annual
Review of Research, Vol. 7, edited by Michael Tonry and Norval Morris. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Matsueda, Ross L., and Karen Heimer. 1987. “Race, Family Structure, and Delinquency: A Test of
Differential Association and Social Control Theories.” American Sociological Review 52:82640.
McLeod, J. D. and Shanahan, M. J. 1993. “Poverty, Parenting, and Children’s Mental Health”
American Sociological Review 58:351-366.
Menaghan, E. G., Kowaleski-Jones and F. L. Mott. 1997. “The intergenerational costs of
parental social stressors: Academic and social difficulties in early adolescence for
children of young mothers.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 38:72-86.
Nagin, Daniel S., David P. Farrington, and Terrie E. Moffitt. 1995. “Life-Course Trajectories of

35

Different Types of Offenders.” Criminology 33:111-139.
Nagin, Daniel S., Greg Pogarsky and David P. Farrington. 1997. “Adolescent Mothers and the Criminal
Behavior of Their Children.” Law and Society Review 31:137-162.
Olweus, Dan. 1979. “Stability of Aggressive Reaction Patterns in Males: A Review.” Psychological
Bulletin 86: 852-875.
________. 1980. “Familial and Temperamental Determinants of Aggressive Behavior in Adolescent
Boys: A Causal Analysis.” Developmental Psychology 16:644-60.
Parcel, Toby L. and Menaghan, Elizabeth G. 1988. “Measuring Behavioral Problems in a Large Cross
Sectional Survey: Reliability and Validity for Children of the NLS Youth.” Manuscript. The
Ohio State University.
________. 1993. “Family Social Capital and Children’s Behavior Problems.” Social Psychology
Quarterly 56:120-135.
________. 1994 “Early Parental Work, Family Social Capital and Early Childhood Outcomes.”
American Journal of Sociology 99:972-1009.
Patterson, Gerald, and Magda Stouthamer-Loeber. 1984. "The Correlation of Family Management
Practices and Delinquency." Child Development 55:1299-1307.
Patterson, Gerald R., and J. B. Reid, and T. M. Dishion. 1992. A Social Interactionist Approach: Vol 4.
Antisocial Boys. Eugene OR: Castalia.
Patterson, Gerald R., and Karen Yoerger. 1997. “A Developmental Model for Late Onset Delinquency.”
Pp. 119-178 in Motivation and Delinquency, Vol. 44 of the Nebraska Symposium on Motivation,
edited by D. W. Osgood. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Rollins, B., and Thomas, D. (1979). “Parental Support, Power and Control Techniques in the
Socialization of Children.” In Contemporary Theories about the Family: Research-based

36

Theories, edited by W. Burr, R. Hill, F. Nye, and I. Reiss. New York: Free Press.
Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 1995. “Sisters, Siblings, and Mothers: The Effect of
Teenage Childbearing on Birth Outcomes in a Dynamic Family Context.” Econometrica 63:303326.
Rutter, Michael. 1983. “Stress, Coping, and Development: Some Issues and Some Questions.” Pp. 1-42
in Stress, Coping, and Development in Children, edited by N. Garmezy and M. Rutter. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Rutter, Michael, and David Quinton. 1984. “Parental Psychiatric Disorder: Effects on Children.”
Psychological Medicine 14:853-80.
Sampson, Robert J. 1987. “Urban Black Violence: The Effect of Male Joblessness and Family
Destruction.” American Journal of Sociology 93: 348-382.
Sampson, Robert J., and John H. Laub. 1993. Crime in the Making: Pathways and Turning Points
Through Life. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Stack, Carik B. 1974. All Our Kin: Strategies for Survival in a Black Community. New York: Harper
& Row, Publishers.
Straus, Murray A. 1991. “Discipline and Deviance: Physical Punishment of Children and Violence and
other Crime in Adulthood.” Social Problems 38:133-154.
Wallerstein, Judith S., and Joan B. Kelly. 1980. Surviving the Breakup: How Children and Parents Cope
with Divorce. New York: Basic Books.
White, Jennifer L., Terrie E. Moffitt, Felton Earls, Lee Robins, and Phil A. Silva. 1990. “How Early Can
we Tell? Predictors of Childhood Conduct Disorder and Adolescent Delinquency.” Criminology
28:507-534.
Wu, Lawrence L. And Brian C. Martinson. 1993. “Family Structure and the Risk of a Premarital Birth.”

37

American Sociological Review 58:210-232.
Zill, Nicholas. 1985. “Behavior Problem Scales Developed from the 1981 Child Health Supplement to
the National Health Interview Survey.” Manuscript. Child Trends, Inc. Washington D.C.

38

Appendix Table 1. Measurement Model for Child Behavior Problems
Externalizing

Items
Bullies
Cheats
Breaks
Disobedient
Argues
Not sorry for mischievous acts
Hangs with troublemakers
Stubborn
Strong temper
High strung
Not concentrate
Confused
Restless
Impulsive
Fearful
Depressed
Worthless
Not loved
Obsessive
Paranoid
Worries
Trouble getting along
Not liked
Withdrawn
Secrets
Demands attention
Depends

0.729
0.635
0.709
0.661
0.665
0.550
0.613
0.742
0.730
0.697
0.646
0.647
0.622
0.710
--------------

Internalizing

--------------0.633
0.755
0.758
0.606
0.680
0.754
0.534
0.754
0.652
0.630
0.563
0.566
0.588

0.0467
Goodness of Fit (RMSEA)
Factor Correlation
Externalizing
1.000
0.700
Internalizing
0.838
Note: Estimated using diagonally weighted least-squares estimator, based on polychoric correlation matrix of valid data from
all children of NLSY (N=7,028). The 2-factor model fits the data well. Correlation among the underlying factors obtained in
the confirmatory factor analysis is displayed below the diagonal; correlation among the constructed composites is displayed
above the diagonal (in italic).

39

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics of Variables Used in Static Analysis
Variable
Mean
Child Behavior Problems
Internalizing
-.13
Externalizing
-.07
Overall
-.04
Background
Black
Mother even been a teen-mom
Mother’s AFQT
Missing AFQT
Child Characteristics
Male
First born
Age
Age squared
Poor health
Number of siblings
Age of youngest sibling
Missing number of siblings
Missing age of youngest sibling
At-Birth Conditions
Mother was <18 at birth
Family income at birth (in $1,000)
Mother’s education at birth
Mother drank during pregnancy
Mother smoked during pregnancy
Missing family income at birth
Missing drinking
Missing smoking
Early Childhood Experience (0-5)
Cumulative duration of intact family
Cumulative duration of living in grandparent home
Cumulative duration of receiving AFDC
Cumulative duration of living in poverty
Current Experience
Intact family
Living in grandparent home
Receiving AFDC
Living in poverty
Duration of current experience
Duration of living in grandparent home
Duration of receiving AFDC
Duration of living in poverty
Missing Experience
Missing intact family
Missing living in grandparent home
Missing receiving AFDC
Missing living in poverty

S.D.

% within Variance

.98
.97
.97

42.0
40.0
37.0

.32
.19
32.86
.05

.47
.39
26.34
.22

0
0
0

.52
.35
8.05
70.50
.22
2.81
5.04
.00
.01

.50
.48
2.40
45.52
.76
1.14
3.35
.04
.10

59.9
84.3
77.0
76.3
50.8
18.4
64.7
58.4
59.5

.03
20.59
11.67
.09
.08
.21
.05
.05

.17
46.93
2.21
.27
.27
.41
.21
.22

58.8
54.6
3.5
40.8
26.9
51.1
54.4
54.7

3.83
.71
1.35
2.11

2.78
1.38
2.11
2.34

22.7
27.2
9.4
8.4

.54
.04
.19
.31

.50
.20
.39
.46

22.4
46.0
25.0
25.4

.12
1.08
1.83

.76
2.64
3.32

45.2
22.0
20.7

.01
.09
.09
.56

.09
.29
.28
.50

11.5
22.1
18.5
29.1
(continued)

40

(table 1 continued)
Variable
Mean
S.D.
Parenting
Spanking
.79
1.30
Cultural activities
1.75
.63
Positive parenting
5.27
4.02
Father’s time
3.26
1.13
Reading activities
3.59
.89
Missing spanking
.17
.38
Missing cultural activities
.22
.42
Missing positive parenting
.25
.43
Missing father’s time
.24
.43
Missing reading activities
.15
.35
Number of Children
4,351
Number of Families
1,805
Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, youths 1979-1994, children 1988-1994.

% within Variance
46.2
38.7
31.9
34.6
45.1
63.7
65.9
64.3
64.9
64.0

41
Table 2. A Sibling Model of Child Behavior Problems: Child Experience of the Family Conditions
Internalizing
Externalizing
Variable
OLS
RE
FE
OLS
RE

Background
Black
Mother ever been a teen mom
Mother’s AFQT

Child Characteristics
Male
First born
Age
Age squared
Poor health
Number of siblings
Age of youngest sibling

At-Birth Conditions
Mother was <18 at birth
Family income at birth
(in $1,000)
Mother’s education at birth
Mother drank during pregnancy
Mother smoked during
Pregnancy

.006
(.038)
.006
(.044)
-.000
(.001)

.073
(.029)
-.011
(.042)
.172
(.058)
-.007
(.003)
.185
(.019)
-.004
(.017)
.005
(.007)

.009
(.045)
-.017
(.052)
-.000
(.001)

*

**
*
***

-.573 ***
(.097)
-.000
(.000)
-.029 **
(.009)
.078
(.053)
.233 ***
(.055)

----

-.016
(.038)
.020
(.044)
.001
(.001)

-.009
(.044)
-.002
(.051)
.001
(.001)

FE

----

OLS

Overall
RE

.000
(.038)
.049
(.044)
.001
(.001)

.004
(.045)
.029
(.052)
.001
(.001)

----

.072 **
(.027)
-.011
(.038)
.107 *
(.054)
-.003
(.003)
.160 ***
(.018)
-.008
(.019)
.006
(.007)

.066 *
(.031)
.022
(.043)
-.017
(.062)
.004
(.003)
.111 ***
(.022)
.011
(.032)
.014
(.008)

.281 ***
(.028)
-.071
(.041)
.082
(.057)
-.003
(.003)
.155 ***
(.019)
-.005
(.017)
.000
(.007)

.281 ***
(.027)
-.077 *
(.038)
.053
(.053)
-.002
(.003)
.135 ***
(.018)
-.019
(.019)
-.001
(.006)

.281 ***
(.031)
-.066
(.043)
-.001
(.061)
.002
(.003)
.096 ***
(.022)
-.034
(.031)
-.002
(.008)

.226 ***
(.028)
.020
(.041)
.076
(.057)
-.003
(.003)
.185 ***
(.019)
-.030
(.016)
-.008
(.007)

.226
(.026)
-.000
(.037)
.079
(.052)
-.003
(.003)
.160
(.018)
-.057
(.019)
-.014
(.006)

-.528 ***
(.091)
-.000
(.000)
-.025 *
(.010)
.075
(.053)
.202 ***
(.057)

-.462 ***
(.106)
-.000
(.000)
-.045
(.033)
.063
(.069)
.126
(.088)

-.222
(.097)
-.000
(.000)
-.041
(.009)
.119
(.052)
.308
(.054)

-.167
(.090)
-.000
(.000)
-.040 ***
(.010)
.100
(.052)
.253 ***
(.057)

-.071
(.105)
-.000
(.000)
-.044
(.033)
.057
(.069)
.066
(.087)

-.121
(.096)
-.001
(.000)
-.059 ***
(.009)
.116 *
(.052)
.285 ***
(.054)

-.049
(.088)
-.000
(.000)
-.060 ***
(.010)
.097
(.051)
.215 ***
(.057)

*

***
*
***

FE

***

***
**
*

.225
(.030)
-.027
(.041)
.084
(.059)
-.003
(.003)
.120
(.021)
-.104
(.030)
-.022
(.008)

***

***
**
**

.021
(.101)
-.000
(.000)
-.066 *
(.032)
.064
(.066)
.020
(.084)
(continued)

42
(table 2 continued)
Variable

Early Childhood Experience
Cumulative duration of
intact family
Cumulative duration of
living in grandparent home
Cumulative duration of
Receiving AFDC
Cumulative duration of
living in poverty
Current Experience
Intact family
Living in grandparent home
Receiving AFDC
Living in poverty

Duration of Current Experience
Duration of living in
Grandparent home
Duration of receiving AFDC
Duration of living in poverty

OLS

Internalizing Problems
RE
FE

OLS

Externalizing Problems
RE
FE

Overall Behavior Problems
OLS
RE
FE

.011
(.011)
-.040 **
(.013)
.008
(.011)
.027 *
(.011)

.013
(.011)
-.049 ***
(.013)
.014
(.012)
.028 *
(.012)

.022
(.014)
-.065 **
(.020)
.016
(.020)
.046 *
(.020)

-.001
(.011)
-.022
(.013)
-.005
(.011)
.043 ***
(.011)

-.001
(.011)
-.028 *
(.013)
-.003
(.012)
.042 ***
(.011)

.003
(.014)
-.039 *
(.020)
-.034
(.020)
.050 **
(.019)

.003
(.011)
-.020
(.013)
-.004
(.011)
.046 ***
(.011)

.001
(.010)
-.025
(.013)
-.002
(.012)
.045 ***
(.011)

.003
(.013)
-.025
(.019)
-.026
(.019)
.049 **
(.019)

-.013
(.055)
.030
(.112)
.012
(.070)
.074
(.057)

-.019
(.056)
-.024
(.107)
.004
(.069)
.077
(.056)

-.009
(.077)
-.144
(.127)
.015
(.087)
.092
(.070)

-.021
(.055)
.138
(.111)
.065
(.070)
.123 *
(.057)

-.029
(.055)
.051
(.105)
.026
(.068)
.121 *
(.055)

-.011
(.076)
-.092
(.126)
-.071
(.086)
.092
(.069)

-.028
(.055)
.141
(.110)
.066
(.070)
.128 *
(.057)

-.029
(.055)
.050
(.104)
.012
(.067)
.112 *
(.054)

.004
(.073)
-.062
(.122)
-.090
(.083)
.057
(.067)

.005
(.030)
.012
(.011)
-.006
(.008)

.025
(.028)
.010
(.011)
-.006
(.009)

.058
(.033)
-.003
(.014)
-.009
(.011)

-.025
(.029)
.008
(.011)
-.022 **
(.008)

-.008
(.028)
.009
(.011)
-.019 *
(.008)

.016
(.033)
.004
(.014)
-.014
(.011)

-.019
(.029)
.008
(.011)
-.022 **
(.008)

.006
(.027)
.012
(.011)
-.017 *
(.008)

.039
(.032)
.012
(.013)
-.007
(.011)

Hausman Test (p-value)
.000
.000
.001
R2
.085
.083
.103
.096
.094
.070
.101
.099
.057
Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, youths 1979-1994, children 1988-1994.
Note: Model estimates are based on a sample of 1,805 families with 4,351 children who had one observation. All models include the dummy variables indicating
missing. Standard errors are in parentheses. We report R-squares overall for RE models and R-squares within for FE models.
* p<.05 ** p<.01 *** p<.001

43
Table 3. A Sibling Model of Child Behavior Problems: Child Experience of the Family Conditions and Parenting
Internalizing Problems
Externalizing Problems
Variable
OLS
RE
OLS
RE
FE
FE

Parenting
Spanking
Cultural activities
Positive parenting
Father’s time
Reading activities

.121
(.011)
-.044
(.023)
-.012
(.004)
-.033
(.014)
-.038
(.017)

***

**
*
*

.114
(.011)
-.049
(.023)
-.009
(.004)
-.029
(.014)
-.033
(.016)

***
*
*
*
*

.096 ***
(.014)
-.063 *
(.029)
-.005
(.005)
-.005
(.018)
-.012
(.020)

.175
(.011)
-.088
(.023)
-.013
(.004)
-.020
(.014)
-.098
(.017)

***
***
***

***

.168
(.011)
-.089
(.023)
-.011
(.004)
-.026
(.014)
-.089
(.016)

***
***
**

***

.149 ***
(.014)
-.082 **
(.030)
-.005
(.005)
-.025
(.018)
-.057 **
(.020)

Overall Behavior Problems
OLS
RE
FE

.164
(.011)
-.073
(.023)
-.013
(.004)
-.026
(.014)
-.084
(.017)

***
**
***

***

.154
(.011)
-.075
(.023)
-.011
(.004)
-.028
(.014)
-.074
(.016)

***
**
***
*
***

.134 ***
(.014)
-.071 *
(.029)
-.005
(.005)
-.019
(.018)
-.041 *
(.019)

Hausman Test (p-value)
.002
.000
.000
R2
.187
.185
.205
.173
.172
.129
.160
.158
.099
Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, youths 1979-1994, children 1988-1994.
Note: Presented are fixed-effects model estimates based on a sample of 1,805 families with 4,351 children who had one observation. All models include child
characteristics, at-birth conditions, childhood experience, and the dummy variables indicating missing values. Standard errors are in parentheses. We report Rsquares overall for RE models and R-squares within for FE models..
* p<.05 ** p<.01 *** p<.001

44
Table 4. A Sibling Model of Child Behavior Problems with Lagged Parenting
Internalizing Problems
Variable
OLS
RE
FE

Lagged Parenting
Spanking
Cultural activities
Positive parenting
Father’s time
Reading activities

.093 ***
(.014)
-.016
(.030)
-.014 **
(.005)
-.057 **
(.018)
-.033
(.022)

.079 ***
(.014)
.001
(.030)
-.012 *
(.005)
-.055 **
(.017)
-.020
(.021)

.048 **
(.017)
.036
(.038)
-.005
(.007)
-.042
(.022)
-.006
(.026)

OLS

Externalizing Problems
RE
FE

.135 ***
(.014)
-.036
(.030)
-.013 **
(.005)
-.023
(.017)
-.087 ***
(.022)

.124 ***
(.014)
-.017
(.030)
-.013 **
(.005)
-.027
(.017)
-.068 **
(.021)

.098 ***
(.017)
.041
(.039)
-.006
(.007)
-.028
(.023)
-.033
(.027)

Overall Behavior Problems
OLS
RE
FE

.128
(.014)
-.027
(.030)
-.014
(.005)
-.039
(.018)
-.074
(.022)

***

**
*
**

.113
(.013)
-.004
(.029)
-.013
(.005)
-.041
(.017)
-.054
(.021)

***

**
*
*

.084 ***
(.017)
.046
(.038)
-.006
(.006)
-.035
(.022)
-.027
(.026)

Hausman Test (p-value)
.011
.004
.001
R2
.105
.103
.071
.151
.149
.101
.149
.146
.101
Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, youths 1979-1994, children 1988-1994.
Note: Presented are estimates based on a sample of 1,326 families with 3,107 children who had two observations. All models include child characteristics, atbirth conditions, childhood experience, and the dummy variables indicating missing values. Standard errors are in parentheses. We report R-squares overall for
RE models and R-squares within for FE models.
* p<.05 ** p<.01 *** p<.001

45
Table 5. A Sibling Model of Child Behavior Problems with Lagged Parenting and Lagged Dependent Variable
Internalizing Problems
Externalizing Problems
Variable
OLS
RE
OLS
RE
FE
FE

Lagged Parenting
Spanking
Cultural activities
Positive parenting
Father’s time
Reading activities
Lagged Predicted Dependent

.092 ***
(.017)
-.011
(.029)
.002
(.005)
-.060 **
(.017)
-.045
(.025)
.808 ***
(.044)

.086 ***
(.017)
-.010
(.030)
.001
(.005)
-.057 **
(.018)
-.041
(.025)
.748 ***
(.045)

.054 *
(.024)
-.013
(.046)
.001
(.009)
-.003
(.030)
-.025
(.035)
.239 ***
(.065)

.107 ***
(.016)
.005
(.028)
-.004
(.005)
-.030
(.017)
-.050 *
(.024)
.834 ***
(.037)

.104 ***
(.016)
.007
(.028)
-.004
(.005)
-.030
(.017)
-.049 *
(.024)
.823 ***
(.037)

.066 **
(.024)
.036
(.045)
-.006
(.009)
-.006
(.029)
-.055
(.035)
.532 ***
(.055)

Overall Behavior Problems
OLS
RE
FE

.104
(.016)
.003
(.028)
-.002
(.005)
-.045
(.017)
-.049
(.024)
.807
(.035)

***

**
*
***

.099
(.016)
.005
(.028)
-.002
(.005)
-.044
(.017)
-.047
(.024)
.786
(.036)

***

**
*
***

.064 **
(.023)
.017
(.045)
-.004
(.008)
-.007
(.029)
-.048
(.034)
.406 ***
(.053)

Variable

Hausman Test (p-value)
.000
.000
.001
R2
.246
.246
.059
.325
.325
.1610
.329
.329
.125
Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, youths 1979-1994, children 1988-1994.
Note: Presented are fixed-effects model estimates based on a sample of 905 families with 2,051 children who had three observations. All models include child
characteristics, at-birth conditions, childhood experience, and the dummy variables indicating missing values. Standard errors are in parentheses. We report Rsquares overall for RE models and R-squares within for FE models.
* p<.05 ** p<.01 *** p<.001

