Trade Creation and Diversion Revisited:
Accounting for Model Uncertainty and Natural Trading Partner Effects *

Theo Eicher
Department of Economics, University of Washington
Ifo Institute at the University of Munich
Christian Henn
Department of Economics, University of Washington
Chris Papageorgiou
Research Department, IMF
Louisiana State University
Working Paper no. 78
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
University of Washington
May 14, 2007

Trade Creation and Diversion Revisited:
Accounting for Model Uncertainty and Natural Trading Partner Effects *

Theo Eicher
Department of Economics, University of Washington
Ifo Institute at the University of Munich
Christian Henn
Department of Economics, University of Washington
Chris Papageorgiou
Research Department, IMF
Louisiana State University

May 14, 2007
Trade theories covering Preferential Trade Agreements (PTAs) are as diverse as the literature in search of their
empirical support. To account for the model uncertainty that surrounds the validity of the competing PTA theories,
we introduce Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA) to the PTA literature. BMA minimizes the sum of Type I and Type
II error, the mean squared error, and generates predictive distributions with optimal predictive performance. Once
model uncertainty is addressed as part of the empirical strategy, we report clear evidence of Trade Creation, Trade
Diversion, and Open Bloc effects. After controlling for natural trading partner effects, Trade Creation is weaker –
except for the EU. To calculate the actual effects of PTAs on trade flows we show that the analysis must be
comprehensive: it must control for Trade Creation and Diversion as well as all possible PTAs. Several prominent
control variables are also shown to be robustly related to Trade Creation; they relate to factor endowments and
economic policy.

JEL Classification: F10, F15, C11
Keywords: Trade Creation and Trade Diversion, Preferential Trade Agreements, Bayesian Model
Averaging, Country-Pair Fixed Effects.

* We thank Steven Yamarik for readily sharing his dataset and Serban Ranca for outstanding research and
programming assistance. Brian Donhauser and Alan van der Hilst provided helpful comments. Christian Henn
acknowledges support from the Henry Buechel Memorial Fellowship. The views expressed in this study are the sole
responsibility of the authors and should not be attributed to the International Monetary Fund, its Executive Board, or
its management.

1. Introduction
Bhagwati and Panagariya (1996) call Preferential Trading Arrangements (PTAs) “two faced.”
They introduce trade liberalization at the cost of discrimination in form of distorted trade
preferences and market access. A controversy has raged since the 1950s regarding the benefits
and costs of PTAs, due to possible Trade Creation among members and Trade Diversion among
nonmembers (Viner, 1950). Time has not provided a consensus; to the contrary: as the
proliferation of PTAs increased in the 1990s, so did the number of theories predicting either
increasing or decreasing trade flows among (non)members. As the volume of competing theories
has grown, the number of associated candidate regressors has also expanded to render
comprehensive robustness analysis using traditional methods virtually impossible. Consequently,
a large empirical literature emerged to estimate different subsets of PTA theories using gravity
equations. It is therefore not surprising that coefficient estimates resulting from such regressions
are well known to be highly dependent on the exact set of regressors selected in each study (see
Baxter and Kouparitsas, 2006).
Ghosh and Yamarik (2004) provide the most extensive PTA robustness analysis to date.
Not only do they include the largest possible number of PTAs, but they also use Extreme Bound
Analysis (Leamer, 1983) to allow for the examination of a diverse set of PTA theories. They find
no evidence of Trade Creation or Diversion for any PTAs and relaxed extreme bounds pick up
only Trade Diverting PTAs. In this paper we introduce Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA) to the
PTA literature, it is a statistical technique specifically designed to incorporate model uncertainty
into the estimation process. It allows us to examine all possible models, to weigh each model
according to quality, and to provide a probability distribution for each coefficient estimate.
Raftery and Zheng (2002) prove that BMA maximizes predictive performance while minimizing
the total error rate when compared to any individual model.1
Using this powerful technique, we take a fresh look at Trade Creation and Diversion for
the 12 major PTAs examined by Ghosh and Yamarik (2004) in a dataset that covers 186
countries and five year intervals from 1970-95. Through country-pair fixed effects we also
address “natural trading partner” effect that have not been fully accounted for by the common
gravity controls. Hummels and Levinsohn (1995) first introduced such fixed effects to better

1

Alternative applications of BMA to international economics are Wright (2003) and Chen and Rogoff (2006).

1

distinguish between factor endowments and market structure as trade flow drivers. Egger and
Pfaffermayr (2003) advocate country-pair fixed effects to account for heterogeneity induced by
time-invariant factors (e.g., geography, history, policy and culture) that are only partially
accounted for by the explanatory variables or completely unobserved. Glick and Rose (2002) use
the same specification as Egger and Pfaffermayr (2003), but motivate country-pair fixed effects
as proxies for multilateral resistance (Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003). A growing literature
on PTAs examines also the endogeneity of PTAs (see Magee, 2003; and Baier and Bergstrand
2002, 2004, 2007). All approaches to endogeneity generally use instruments that are also
controlled for by our country-pair fixed effects. Country-pair fixed effects have been introduced
into the analysis of PTAs by Cheng and Wall (2005), who examine Trade Creation for a subset
of 5 RTAs in 29 countries over 3 years. Below we examine Trade Creation and Diversion for
186 countries, 12 PTAs over 25 years while simultaneously accounting for model uncertainty.
Our main finding is threefold. First, in our benchmark specification (which does not
correct for country-pair fixed effects to replicate Ghosh and Yamarik, 2004) PTAs are shown to
exhibit strong Trade Creation and Diversion. Second, after controlling for additional omitted
variable bias with country-pair fixed effects, we find that most of the previously large PTA
effects were due to natural trading partnerships. Trade Creation is muted, and all but one Trade
Diversion effects disappear. Controlling fully for natural trading partner effects also highlights
strong Open Bloc Trade Creation for a number of major PTAs. We can only speculate that these
PTAs may have been created exactly because of such unobservables, but we cannot attribute the
change in trade flows to the formation of PTAs (as pooled OLS regressions would). Finally, Our
results emphasize that the appropriate empirical strategy to isolate effects of PTAs must involve
as many PTAs as possible. The exact Open Bloc Trade Creation effect for a given PTA can only
be determined after examining the exact interaction between PTAs. The actual impact of a PTA
on bilateral trade is shown to depend not only on its own Trade Creation and Diversion but also
on its trading partner’s PTA effects.
These results are at odds with Ghosh and Yamarik (2004) and the differences arise for
three reasons. First, BMA inference is based on an unrestricted search of the model space
spanned by all candidate regressors. Secondly, BMA theory requires that each model is weighed
according to its quality, while Extreme Bound Analysis weighs models equally and thus
attributes equal power of inference to exceptionally weak or strong models. What is important,

2

however, is not whether a method is too stringent to deliver results, but whether the methodology
is theory-based and efficient.2 Finally, our second set of results regarding the impact of natural
trading partners differ from Ghosh and Yamarik’s (2004) because we expand their dataset to
allow for 3,420 additional fixed effects in the second part of our analysis.
BMA’s improved model selection approach and accounting for model uncertainty leads
to the resolution of a number of empirical puzzles in the PTA literature. The implausibly large
APEC coefficient that is commonly observed in the literature is only initially confirmed by
BMA; after controlling for country-pair specific fixed effects, however, the purely consultative
APEC no longer exhibits strong effects on trade flows. The European PTAs, on the other hand,
reveal their strong impact only after we control for country-pair fixed effects, which establishes
that EU countries naturally under-trade relative to the prediction of the standard gravity model.3
NAFTA is shown to be the only Trade Diverting PTA and this only in trade with a select subset
of countries. Due to the strong Open Bloc effects among Asian and European countries, their
trade with NAFTA actually increased over the period of our sample.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the BMA
methodology used in our estimation to resolve model uncertainty present in the theoretical PTA
literature. Since BMA is relatively new to international economics, we discuss briefly its basic
framework. In Section 3 we take a look at the data and in Section 4 we report and discuss our
results. Section 5 concludes.

2.1 The Empirical Framework
Econometric studies that seek to identify the impact of PTAs on trade flows are generally based
on the gravity model.4 The approach fits the application particularly well, due to the gravity
model’s proven efficiency in predicting trade flows (see Frankel and Romer, 1999). This allows
PTA coefficients to pick up on deviations between predicted and actual trade. The basic gravity
framework is given by

log Tijt = α t + β1 log Yit Y jt + β 2 log Dij + β 3 X ijt + ε ijt ,

(1)

2

Previous comparisons between Extreme Bound Analysis and BMA results have also found Extreme Bound
Analysis to be excessively stringent (see Sala-i-Martin, 1997; and Fernandez, Ley and Steel, 2001a).
3
Predominantly negative residuals for European country pairs tend to be a feature of the standard gravity model, an
observation that has been made repeatedly in the literature, see e.g. Pollak (1996) or Rose (2004).
4
The theoretical foundations of the gravity model are presented in Frankel (1997) and Deardorff (1998).

3

where bilateral trade, Tijt, between country pairs i and j at time t depends positively on national
incomes, Yit and Y jt , and negatively on bilateral distance, Dij. Typically a matrix of covariates,
Xijt, is included to represent alternative trade theories and to proxy for unobservable trade costs.
The inclusion of time fixed effects, α t , is standard in the literature to eliminate bias resulting
from aggregate shocks to world trade. Time fixed effects also mitigate any spurious correlation
introduced, for example, by the use of a U.S. price index to deflate trade flows.
We follow Ghosh and Yamarik (2004) and include dummies that capture PTA effects on
bilateral trade. The matrix Xijt is then split into PTA related dummies and other covariates, Zijt,
which we discuss in section 2.2. We then obtain
log Tijt = α t + β 1 log Yit Y jt + β 2 log Dij + β 3 Z ijt + β 4 PTAijt + β 5 PTAit + ε ijt . (2)
Two sets of zero-one dummy variables are included to indicate whether two trading partners are
members of the same PTA in year t, PTAijt, or whether only one trading partner has joined, PTAit.
These dummies enable us to isolate the three distinct effects that PTAs may exert on trade flows.
A positive coefficient on PTAijt captures Trade Creation among PTA members, while Trade
Diversion registers a negative PTAit coefficient. Finally, Open Bloc Trade Creation is simply the
opposite of Trade Diversion, characterized by positive PTAit coefficients.
In equation (3) we extend the Ghosh and Yamarik (2004) framework to include countrypair fixed effects in order to account for the possibility of “natural trading partners.” The term
natural trading partner thus goes beyond pure distance or trade costs arguments. It captures any
and all similarities among trading partners that are constant over time. The country-pair fixed
effects model is the most general formulation of the gravity equation (Cheng and Wall, 2005)
and a substantial literature insists that formulations without controls for unobserved
heterogeneity are misspecified and biased (e.g., Egger, 2000; Baldwin, 2005). If country-pair
fixed effects are omitted, the PTA coefficients are biased upward, if they pick up Trade Creation
that is simply due to deep seated unobservables.
~
log Tijt = α t + α ij + β 1 log Yit Y jt + β 3 Z ijt + β 4 PTAijt + β 5 PTAit + ε ijt

(3)

Notice that by controlling for country-pair fixed effects, we lose our ability to estimate the direct
~
effect of time-invariant variables, such as distance, Dij. The matrix of controls is reduced to Z ijt ,
since the explanatory power of time-invariant regressors is absorbed by the country-pair fixed

4

effects.5 In Table 3 we report results of regressions with and without country-pair fixed effects to
allow for direct comparisons with the Ghosh and Yamarik (2004) benchmark.

2.2 Theory and Model Uncertainty in the PTA Literature

There exists a voluminous literature that discusses the appropriate controls to be included in Zij.
They include covariates that reference Geography, Historical, Economic Policy, and
Development/Factor Endowments. Each control is motivated by a particular theory, and at times
the same control is claimed for different theories (with opposite sign), which reflects the inherent
model uncertainty. Below we provide a brief description of the motivations and theories
associated with the various controls suggested by the previous literature to highlight the diversity
of the approaches. It is crucial for us to outline this diversity of approaches to justify the use of
the model averaging methodology. Table 2 summarizes the degree of model uncertainty by
tabulating the relationships of our covariates with bilateral trade as estimated by earlier studies.
The table highlights the many attempts to identify determinants of trade flows, and the plethora
of differing and/or opposite results. It provides a visual motivation for addressing model
uncertainty inherent in gravity/PTA regressions directly as part of the estimation technique.
It is important to the BMA methodology to outline the theoretical backbone of each
regressor included in the analysis. Without theoretical support the results are difficult to
interpret. Feenstra, Markusen and Rose (2001) argue that empirical gravity models can be used
to discriminate between alternative trade theories and Leamer (1978) first emphasized that any
uncertainty regarding the validity of a theory must be accounted for in the empirical strategy. If
the uncertainty about the true specification is not accounted for in the econometric method, the
precision of estimates is inflated, since they neglect the uncertainty surrounding the true theory.
We therefore commence with a brief sketch of the alternative theories that have been
proposed to identify the effect of preferential trade agreements on trade flows. We start with
important control variables that capture Historical Ties, such as Common Language, Common
Colonizer, or Colony. These covariates are commonly added in attempts to capture transaction

5

We sacrifice insights regarding the time-invariant, country-pair regressors in hopes of attaining less contaminated
PTA coefficients. The effects of such regressors could be recaptured in a two-stage procedure where the first stage is
given by (3) and the regression in the second stage uses the estimated fixed effects as a dependent variable and timeinvariant regressors are explanatory variables.

5

costs caused by the inability to communicate and/or overcome cultural differences.6 Common
historical ties lead to similar institutions and similar levels of development, implying reliable
contractual and legal standards, as well as trust in shared values. Controlling for model
uncertainty addresses not only which one of these regressors (or regressor combinations) is
appropriate, but also whether their inclusion is indeed approximating the true model.
Geographic factors have been introduced as further proxies for either transport costs (e.g.,
Aitken, 1973), trade-and-geography theories (e.g., Helpman and Krugman, 1985), or for New
Trade Theories (e.g., Rivera-Batiz and Romer, 1991). Remoteness is widely used to capture the
notion that relatively remote country pairs are expected to trade more, because they have fewer
options in choosing trade partners.7 It has also been motivated as a proxy for “multilateral
resistance”, or the average trade costs facing a country (Brun et al., 2005; Carrere, 2006). Area is
supposed to capture self-sufficiency and scale effects that are prominent in both the New Trade
and Growth Theories (e.g., Rose, 2000; Rose and Van Wincoop, 2001; Soloaga and Winters,
2001). Scale effects are also proxies for technology or knowledge spillovers (e.g., Grossman and
Helpman, 1991).
Alternative proxies in the Geography category, such as Border, Landlocked, and Island
have previously been utilized by a variety of authors although it is not immediately clear why
adjacency should matter after having controlled for distance.8 Perhaps variables that measure
distance center-to-center introduce errors that are mitigated by the additional controls because
neighboring countries often engage in large volumes of border trade. BMA addresses the
uncertainty among Geography variables and resolves whether additional proxies for proximity
ought to be included and which covariates are relevant to explaining how PTAs influenced trade
patterns.
Development/Factor Endowments covariates juxtapose the Heckscher-Ohlin factor
endowments driven trade theory with Linder’s (1961) hypothesis that similar countries trade
more due to comparable tastes. Davis (1995) presents an augmented Heckscher-Ohlin-Ricardo
model that provides support for either theory, depending on the technological distance between
the countries and Splimbergo and Stein (1996) examine the issue empirically. Common proxies
6

See Wei (1996), Frankel (1997), Frankel and Rose (2002), Rose (2000), Soloaga and Winters (2001), and Rose and
van Wincoop (2001).
7
See, for example, Wei (1996), Rose (2000), Soloaga and Winters (2001),and Baier and Bergstrand (2007).
8
See Frankel and Romer (1999), Feenstra, Markusen and Rose (2001), Frankel and Rose (2002), Rose (2000), Rose
and van Wincoop (2001), and Soloaga and Winters (2001).

6

for factor endowments differences are based on Per Capita GDP, Schooling, and Population
Density.9 The best theoretical rationale for Per Capita GDP is based on the strategic trade
literature (e.g., Helpman and Krugman, 1985) that predicts intra-industry trade decreases with
differences in the countries’ levels of development. Furthermore, countries with higher per capita
GDP are likely to have better access to less distortionary revenue sources, hence they may
experience more bilateral trade since they can afford lower tariffs.
Economic Policy variables in the matrix Zijt include measures related to trade/financial
openness and exchange rate management. These are important controls to account for trade
restrictions that may explain trade patterns’ deviations from those implied by the pure gravity
equation. The Sachs-Warner Trade Openness variable is inserted into the gravity equation to
account for trade policy effects. In addition, proxies that measure capital account openness, and
financial transaction costs such as Currency Union, Floating FX Rate, and FX Volatility are
usually included although which coefficient estimates are to be expected is riddled with
uncertainty. Clark et al. (2004) survey the literature and highlight that just this subset of
regressors alone is so deeply affected by model uncertainty that the impact of exchange rate
fluctuations depends on the specific assumptions of each model.10
Finally we address model uncertainty in the PTA theory itself.11 Not only do we have
opposing implications suggested by different theories, at times opposing theories have been
suggested by the same author (e.g., Krugman, 1991a,b). The theory of PTAs is based on Viner’s
(1950) theory of Trade Creation and Diversion. By the 1990s, however, a full scale discussion
erupted regarding the drivers of Trade Creation and Diversion. Krugman (1991a,b) examined the
relative merits of PTAs in a static, monopolistically-competitive framework that emphasized
economic geography. His first model implied PTAs should not be welfare creating in the absence
of intercontinental transport costs. At the other extreme, Krugman’s second model suggested
PTAs increase trade flows and subsequently welfare in the presence of prohibitive transport
costs. Krugman’s theories led Frankel (1997), Frankel, Stein, and Wei (1995), and Wei and
Frankel (1998) to develop theories based on a continuum of transport costs. Their work
9

They have been introduced by Frankel, Stein and Wei (1995), Frankel (1992), Frankel (1997), Frankel and Wei
(1993), Frankel and Rose (2002), Rose and van Wincoop (2001), and Freund (2000).
10
Authors who introduced such regressors into the gravity equation include Rose (2000), Frankel and Rose (2002),
Rose and van Wincoop (2001), Glick and Rose (2002) and Tenreyro and Barro (2002).
11
For a more detailed literature review, the reader is directed to any of a number of surveys of various approaches to
the study of PTAs, including Panagariya (1999, 2000).

7

characterizes trade partners as “natural” on the basis of relatively low intra-continental transport
costs and their approach implies that Trade Creation among “natural” trading partners should
dominate small Trade Diversion among remote country pairs from a welfare perspective. As
trade costs fall, however, Trade Diversion may become larger since “natural” trading partners are
“locked” into PTAs. Frankel, Stein and Wei (1995) suggest two hypotheses. First, the more
remote trading partners are from the rest of the world, the more likely they are to form PTAs due
to less potential Trade Diversion. This effect could be picked up by the Remoteness proxy, too.
Second, the more “natural” trading partners are, the more likely PTAs are to lead to Trade
Creation.
Krugman’s and Frankel, Stein and Wei’s theories are based on one factor, one industry
models. Deardorff and Stern (1994) and Haveman (1996), note that these models preclude trade
due to comparative advantage. Deardorff and Stern point out that this “stacks the cards” against
bilateralism and argue that, given differences in factor endowments, trade with a few countries
suffices in order to maximize gains from trade, so that Trade Diversion would be minimal.
Freund (2000) instead argues strongly for PTA Open Bloc Trade Creation effects (even if Trade
Creation among members is absent) since PTAs help outside exporters overcome fixed trade
costs. Trade Diverting effects instead are highlighted by Bond and Syropoulos (1996) and
Syropoulos (1999), who indicate that the increased market power of the PTA, relative to the
market power of each member taken individually, may lead to higher external tariffs.

2.3 Accounting for Model Uncertainty: Empirical Methodology

Next we briefly comment on the BMA methodology used in our estimation. We will limit
ourselves to discussing the properties relevant to our application. The interested reader is referred
to the comprehensive tutorial by Raftery et al. (1997) for further discussion. The Bayesian
framework is a natural candidate to address model uncertainty surrounding the correct controls in
(2) and (3), since it provides a probability distribution over the model space as well as over the
parameter space. In our PTA estimation, the model space consists of all the possible subsets of
candidate regressors that have been suggested by the distinct theories summarized above.
For linear regression models, the basic BMA setup can be concisely summarized as
follows. Given a dependent variable, Y, a number of observations, n, and a set of candidate

8

regressors, X 1 , X 2 ,..., X k , the variable selection problem is to base inference on the quality of
model
Y = α + ∑ j =1 β j X j + ε ,
p

(4)

where X 1 , X 2 ,..., X p is a subset of X 1 , X 2 ,..., X k , and β is a vector of regression coefficients to
be estimated. Given the data, d, BMA first estimates a posterior distribution P( β r | d , M k ) for
every candidate regressor, r, in every model Mk that includes βr. It then combines all posterior
distributions into a weighted averaged posterior distribution, P ( β r | d ) , using each model’s
posterior probability, P ( M k | d ) , as model weight

P( β r | d ) =

∑ P( β

r ∈M k

r

| d , M k ) P( M k | d ) .

(5)

The posterior model probability of M k is simply the ratio of M k ’s marginal likelihood to the
sum of the marginal likelihoods over all other models12
P(M k | d ) =

l (d | M k )
2k

.

(6)

∑ l (d | M h )

h =1

Intuitively, this implies that a model’s weight is proportional to its relative efficiency in
describing the data. Posterior model probabilities are also the weights used to establish the
posterior means and variances
K
E [β k | d ] = ∑k∈M βˆk pr (M k | d ) ,

(

)

K
2
Var [β k | d ] = ∑k∈M Var [β k | d , M k ] + βˆk2 pr (M k | d ) − E [β k | d ] .

(7)
(8)

Providing economically meaningful coefficient estimates requires conditioning them on whether
a regressor is included in the model (otherwise the distribution would contain a spike a zero,
representing models that do not include the regressor). By summing the posterior model
probabilities over all models that include a candidate regressor, we obtain the posterior inclusion
probability
12

Equation (6) assumes a uniform prior over the model space, which is the standard in the literature; see Raftery et
al. (1997) and Fernandez, Ley and Steel (2001a,b). The marginal likelihood includes parameter priors, and their
choice can be contentious, see Eicher, Papageorgiou and Raftery (2007). Given the large dataset, our results are
insensitive to the choice of parameter priors.

9

P(β k ≠ 0 | d ) = ∑r∈M P(M k | d ) .

(9)

The posterior inclusion probability of a regressor is the probability that a variable is included in
the true model describing bilateral trade. It also provides a probability statement regarding the
importance of a regressor that directly addresses the researchers’ prime concern: what is the
probability that the coefficient has a non-zero effect on the dependent variable. The posterior
inclusion probability thus also carries an important interpretation that goes beyond the is
information contained in standard P-values.
The general rule developed by Jefferies (1961) and refined by Kass and Raftery (1995)
stipulates effect-thresholds for posterior probability. Posterior probabilities < 50% are seen as
evidence against an effect, and the evidence for an effect is either weak, positive, strong, or
decisive for posterior probabilities ranging from 50-75%, 75-95%, 95-99%, and > 99%,
respectively. In our analysis, we refer to a regressor as “effective,” if its posterior inclusion
probability exceeds 50%.
BMA has a number of key advantages over estimating a single model and over Extreme
Bound Analysis. Hjort and Claeskens (2003) point out that for good reasons BMA “dominates
the literature on accounting for model uncertainty in statistical inference.” Raftery and Zheng
(2003) summarize the main theoretical results proving that BMA a) minimizes the total error rate
(sum of Type I and Type II error probabilities), b) point estimates and predictions minimize
mean squared error (MSE); and c) predictive distributions have optimal predictive performance
relative to other approaches. BMA applications in economics include Fernandez, Ley and Steel
(2001a), Eicher, Papageorgiou and Roehn (2007) and Hansen (2007).
As compared to Extreme Bound Analysis, BMA actually examines the entire model
space and forces no restrictions on the size of the model that can be considered. For example,
Ghosh and Yamarik (2004) only consider models that contain a specific number of fixed
variables to which a specific number of regressors is rotated in and out across models. This limits
the search for the exact model to an exceedingly small part of the model space. The absence of
information regarding the quality of models in Extreme Bound Analysis renders the approach
excessively stringent (see Sala-i-Martin, 1997 and Sala-i-Martin, Doppelhofer and Miller, 2004).

10

3. Data

Our baseline dataset is identical to Ghosh and Yamarik (2004) to allow for a clean reexamination
of the evidence with our alternative statistical method. Their dataset, in turn, is based on Frankel
and Rose (2002); it covers 186 countries in 3,420 bilateral trade pairs at five year intervals from
1970 to 1995 and has 14,522 observations.13 We analyze 12 major PTAs (summarized in Table
1), which results in 12 PTAijt and 12 PTAit dummies. PTAijt takes the value of 1, when both
trading partners i and j are members of the same PTA; and PTAit takes the value of 1 when only
one country is a member of the PTA.14 The dependent variable is average bilateral trade recorded
in U.S. dollars and deflated by the American GDP chain price index. Bilateral trade agreements
are also prevalent, but their inclusion is unlikely to change our results since most datasets contain
only a few bilateral agreements prior to 1995. In addition to the basic gravity and trade
agreement variables, 16 controls variables have been suggested by various gravity approaches,
which we discussed in Section 2.2. Table 2 lists and describes all variables.

4. Results
4.1 PTA Trade Creation / Diversion: Differences due to Methodologies

Ghosh and Yamarik (2004) embarked on the most comprehensive robustness test of PTAs to
date. They considered not just a subset, but all major PTAs and go far beyond what any ordinary
robustness exercise can hope to represent. Our first objective is to contrast our BMA results with
Ghosh and Yamarik’s (2004) finding that there are no robust effects associated with any PTA.
BMA results are provided in Table, where the three columns 3-5 present posterior
inclusion probabilities, means, and standard deviations for our baseline Specification 1. While
the actual regressions are in logs, we also report in column 6 the implied percentage changes in

13

See Ghosh and Yamarik (2004, Appendix C) for further details. To deal with the large number of fixed effects in
BMA, we use a partitioned regression technique equivalent to Andrews et al.'s (2006) “FEiLSDVj” method.
14
The PTAs are the European Union (EU), European Free Trade Arrangement (EFTA), European Economic Area
(EEA), Central American Common Market (CACM), Caribbean Community (CARICOM), North America Free
Trade Arrangement (NAFTA), Latin America Integration Agreement (LAIA), Andean Pact (AP), Southern Cone
Common Market (MERCOSUR), Association of South-East Asian Nations Free Trade Area (AFTA), AustraliaNew Zealand Trade Agreement (ANZCERTA), and Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC).

11

trade flows to clarify the exposition.15 Coefficients on PTAijt variables can then be interpreted as
the percentage changes in trade volume between two PTA members relative to the trade volumes
the countries would have experienced if they had been non-members. A positive coefficient
represents Trade Creation. Coefficients on PTAit reflect percentage changes in bilateral trade
when only one of the two trading partners belongs to a PTA. Positive coefficients are evidence
for Open Bloc Trade Creation, while a negative coefficients suggest Trade Diversion.
The first important result is that the BMA methodology provides clear evidence that
PTAs generate not only Trade Creation, but also Open Bloc Trade Creation, and Trade
Diversion. While Specification 1 is identical in structure/data to Ghosh and Yamarik (2004) and
differs only in terms of its methodology, the results disagree sharply with their implication that
PTAs have no effect on trade flows. We obtain effective coefficients (indicated with asterisks)
whose signs and magnitudes are similar to those commonly reported in the previous literature.
BMA thus provides strong evidence that the expansion of the search space from Extreme Bound
Analysis’s particular subset of “free and doubtful variables” to the entire model space, along
with theory-based model averaging to address model uncertainty, yields fundamentally different
results.
Four trade agreements are shown to possess large Trade Creation effects (CACM,
CARICOM, APEC, LAIA). In addition there is ample evidence for Open Bloc Trade Creation
(EU, APEC, EFTA, MERCOSUR), but also widespread support for Trade Diverting effects of
PTAs (LAIA, ANZCERTA, NAFTA, CARICOM, CACM, and AP). The theory-based BMA
approach which accounts for model uncertainty thus provides solid support for all types of PTA
effects predicted by trade theory. With the exception of Exchange Rate Regimes and Volatility,
Schooling Differences, and the Island Dummy, all theory-based controls are also highly
significant and enter with signs and magnitudes familiar from earlier studies.
The implication is then that the models discovered by Extreme Bound Analysis may not
have contained those with high posterior probabilities, and that inappropriate weighting of the
various models led to excessively conservative Extreme Bound Analysis implications. As
mentioned in Section 2.3 above, it follows from the non-negativity of the Kullback-Leibler
information divergence criterion that averaging over all the models in BMA fashion provides the
best predictive performance, compared to predictions based on any subset of models. Therefore
15

The transformation from logs to percentage changes follows Rose (2000). Details are provided in Table 4a.

12

we can securely rely on the BMA results to state that PTAs do generate Trade Creation,
Diversion and Open Bloc effects.
The scale of some of the Trade Creation effects is surprising, if not implausible, implying
at times four to eight fold increases in trade. Coefficients of such aberrant magnitudes have been
noted and questioned in the previous PTA literature (e.g., Frankel, 1992; Frankel and Wei, 1993;
Frankel, Stein and Wei, 1995; Frankel, 1997). Our contention is that the coefficients in
Specification 1 are contaminated by omitted variable bias. If the control variables in Zijt do not
account fully for natural trading partner effects, the PTAijt coefficients are likely biased upward,
since they may well pick up Trade Creation that is actually due to the natural similarities
between trading partners. We investigate this bias further in the next section.

4.2 PTA Trade Creation / Diversion: Accounting for Natural Trading Partners

In order to capture any and all unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity among trade partners we
reestimate Specification 1, accounting for country-pair fixed effects in Specification 2 (Table 3
columns 7-10).16 A comparison of the two specifications in Table 3 highlights that the estimated
effects of PTAs on trade flows depend crucially on how researchers control for country
similarities. The differences between the specifications imply that substantial coefficient bias
contaminates PTA estimates in Specification 1 when “natural trading partner effects” are not
fully addressed by the control variables. In other words, the 16 geography, history, and culture
regressors that have been introduced by previous studies to capture similarities across countries
do not fully account for the apparently considerable systematic bilateral heterogeneity.
Specification 2 in Table 3 maintains that PTAs have important effects on Trade Creation,
Diversion and Open Blocs; however, the effects are reduced and mainly limited to Trade
Diversion/Open Bloc effects. Massive Trade Creation by CARICOM and APEC in Specification
1 is entirely negated by the country-pair fixed effects.17 On the other hand, the EU exhibits
strong Trade Creation in Specification 2, although Specification 1 provided no such evidence. Of
the 9 Trade Diversion / Open Bloc effects in Specification 1, only three remain significant in
16

These country-pair effects could, for example, speak to similarities in economic and social institutions, such as
corruption or rule of law, or simple economic infrastructure such as telecommunications. A concrete example would
be France-Germany, with excellent transport links (unobserved) and a PTA (observed), vs. Afghanistan-Kazakhstan,
with bad transport links (unobserved) and no PTA (observed).
17
In the presence of country-pair fixed effects, the estimates in Specification 2 are based on countries joining and
leaving PTAs, which represents the true marginal effect of an PTA. CACM and LAIA then drop out due to a lack of
variation in membership (countries exiting or joining) over the sample period.

13

Specification 2. It is comforting to note that all but one Trade Diversion coefficients lose
significance once we account for country-pair fixed effects. Specification 1 clearly shows Trade
Creation among PTA members, and while Specification 2 does not rule out that PTAs were
formed because of country-pair similarities, it highlights that we cannot attribute all Trade
Creation to PTAs. Rather, PTA members exhibit other non-PTA related unobserved similarities,
which enhance bilateral trade.18 Systematic country-pair unobservables that previously
contaminated the PTA coefficients are now absorbed into the country-pair fixed effects along
with time-invariant geographic and historic variables, thereby allowing a clean examination of
the effects of PTA accession.
The EU is one PTA that is found to be clearly Trade Creating and not Trade Diverting.
The EU Trade Creation effect materializes only, however, after we fully account for similarities
among countries. One would expectto find robust Trade Creation among EU members, since it is
by far the most integrated PTA in terms of trade barrier reductions and policy harmonization.
Such deep integration also constitutes an argument in favor of Open Bloc effects based on fixed
trade costs (see Freund, 2000). Pollak (1996) points out that it has been well known since the
original Linnemann (1966) gravity specification that the approach systematically over-predicts
trade among geographically proximate countries and under-predicts trade between distant
country pairs. Gravity model refinements have attempted to capture some of this effect by adding
the Remoteness variable. The comparison between our specification 1 and 2 shows, however,
that this does not purge the entire systematic error.
In the presence of systematic under-trading compared to the gravity equation’s predicted
trade flows, and in the absence of country-pair fixed effects, the PTA dummy for EU
membership in specification 1 is insignificant because it picks up two opposing effects: (1)
systematic under-trading of European countries relative to the gravity equations prediction even
after Remoteness has been taken into account, and (2) the effect of EU accession. Since
specification 2 controls for country pair fixed effects, the systematic under-trading is purged
from the estimate and only the true effect of EU accession on bilateral trade remains. Note that
we can observe the exact opposite effect in the case of APEC countries (as predicted by
Linnemann, 1966). As APEC countries are unusually distant geographically, they overtrade
relative to the gravity predictions even after the Remoteness variable has been added. This effect
18

The findings are also in line with those of Hummels and Levinsohn (1995).

14

turns out to be the exclusive driver behind its positive coefficient in Specification 1.
Specification 2 illustrates that there exist no considerable APEC accession effect once we
account for Linnemann’s (1966) finding that the gravity specification systematically underpredicts trade between geographically distant country pairs. This is comforting, since APEC
never instituted either tariff reductions or trade arrangements among its members.

4.3 Quantifying PTAs’ Open Bloc and Trade Creation Effects

The detailed evaluation of the economic impact of PTAs on trade flows requires careful
examination of each individual PTA coefficient. The results cannot be interpreted simply by
reading off posterior means because membership in PTAs is overlapping and several countries
may enter and exit PTAs, or belong to different PTAs during the sample period. Table 4
summarizes the net effects of each PTA on bilateral trade flows.
Table 4 has three important implications. First, on the diagonal, we recognize the object
of our discussion in Section 4.2, namely that evidence for Trade Creation within PTAs is weak
once we have accounted for country-pair fixed effects. The only exception is the EU, which
presented a 93% increase in bilateral trade among member countries. Second, we observe Trade
Diversion / Open Bloc Trade Creation among PTAs on the off-diagonals. These cells contain
perhaps the most important implication of our PTA analysis: a complete assessment of PTA
effects requires a comprehensive evaluation of all PTAs together. For example, Column 1
highlights that the NAFTA Trade Diversion is significantly muted and at times overturned when
NAFTA countries trade with other PTAs – due to the other PTAs’ strong Open Bloc effects. In
the remaining columns, cross-PTA trade is always Open Bloc Trade Creating and often
amplified by the interaction between two PTAs’ Open Bloc effects. This provides ample
evidence that the analysis of preferential trade agreements must include dummies that pick up
both, Trade Creation and Trade Diversion to gauge the exact effects across PTAs.
In the same vein, it is interesting to note that, while no Open Bloc effects emanate from
the EU in trade with non-member countries, trade with just about every other PTA is shown to
have increased due to strong Open Bloc effects of other PTAs. The result is especially important
because the EU features a customs union and one may have expected its large monopoly power
to lead to incentives to reduce trade with non-members. Finally, Table 4 indicates strong trade
gains for Pacific Rim and Asian countries’ membership in AFTA, APEC and ANZCERTA.

15

These are generated without the inflated Trade Creation coefficients that are usually observed in
the literature.

4.4 Beyond PTAs: Trade Creation/Diversion and Economic Policy/Factor Endowments

So far we have solely considered the impact of PTAs on trade flows. While the Geography and
History controls are highly significant in Specification 1 (in agreement with the previous
literature), their effects are absorbed into the country-pair fixed effects in Specification 2.
Nevertheless a number of important non-PTA related controls need to be examined regarding
their effect on trade. Trade Openness is a key variable in both specifications, which is not
surprising since we are attempting to explain trade flows. More interesting is that a host of
variables related to exchange rate policy are not significant in either specification.
The Currency Union variable is significant only in Specification 1, indicating an
extraordinarily large, 307% increase in trade, which is in line with Rose’s (2000) estimate. This
result evaporates entirely, however, once we consider country-pair fixed effects. Glick and Rose
(2002) also find a sharp reduction in the effects of currency unions on trade flows after
accounting for country-pair fixed effects, but with our introduction of the PTA variables the
currency union effect vanishes entirely. This reversal of the currency union result might be
caused by the fact that natural trade partners have synchronized business cycles and therefore
greater incentives to join a currency union (see Frankel and Rose, 1998), which cannot be
controlled for in Specification 1.
The expanded gravity equation has also been subjected to an extensive robustness check
with regards to the development or factor endowment determinants of trade flows. The
competing hypotheses being that trade flows are either driven by differences in endowments
(Heckscher-Ohlin) or by similarities (Lindner). In Specification 1, the Heckscher-Ohlin factor
endowment theory finds strong support as differences in per capita GDPs and population
densities are strongly associated with greater trade flows. The magnitudes of both coefficients
are just about identical, implying that bilateral trade increases by roughly 20% when one of the
trading partners is twice as dense or wealthy as the other. After considering country-pair fixed
effects, the density differences still impact trade flows positively. However, per capita GDP
differences changes sign providing support for the Linder hypothesis. This change is likely
caused by the country pair fixed effects picking up slow-moving factor endowment differences

16

as pointed out by Hummels and Levinsohn (1995). It thus seems like the data supports both
Heckscher-Ohlin’s and Linder’s hypotheses simultaneously.
Taken together, these results reveal two positive implications for North-South trade:
First, Specification 1 shows that North-South differences do drive trade flows (likely due to
Heckscher-Ohlin-type factor endowment differences, which are later absorbed by the pair fixed
effects). Second, Specification 2 indicates that North-South trade will increase strongly as
developing countries catch up to their industrialized counterparts and develop more similar
tastes, thereby increasing Linder-type trade. Finally, differences in education attainment are not
robustly related to trade in either specification, similar to the results found in Frankel, Stein and
Wei (1995).

5. Conclusion

The literature on preferential trade agreements (PTAs) features an unusual diversity of
theoretical and empirical approaches. In this paper we incorporate the uncertainty about the true
theory into our empirical strategy by applying Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA). To date the
most extensive robustness analysis by Ghosh and Yamarik (2004) used Extreme Bound Analysis
and found evidence against any effects of PTAs. In contrast, BMA indicates that PTA-internal
Trade Creation is significantly positive and it produces coefficient estimates that resolve a
number of empirical puzzles. We show that large Trade Creation is often an artifact of natural
trading partners that formed PTAs. Once we also control for country-pair specific heterogeneity,
we several strong Open Block effects but only one Trade Creating effect within a PTA (for the
EU). This is quite intuitive, given that the EU also institutes the most profound market access for
member countries. Trade diversion is only observed in one PTA (NAFTA) and there is strong
evidence for significant Open Bloc Trade Creation among PTAs in Europe and Asia.
Another implication of our empirical investigation is that PTA analyses must be
comprehensive. We show that studies must separate out Trade Creation and Trade Diversion to
highlight the specific trade effects of PTAs. In addition, empirical studies must consider an
exhaustive set of PTAs, since any individual’s PTA’s trade influence is not only a function of its
own direct effect, but also a function of its interaction with other PTAs’ Open Bloc effects.
These effects can be significant. For example NAFTA’s Trade Diversion is actually turned into
Trade Creation when we consider the specific bilateral trade flows with AFTA and EFTA.

17

References

Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J.A., 2001. “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation”, American Economic Review, 91, pp. 1369-1401.
*Aitken, N.D., 1973. “The Effect of the EEC and EFTA on European Trade: A Temporal CrossSection Analysis”, American Economic Review, 63 (5), pp. 881-892.
*Aitken, N.D., Lowry, W., 1973. “A cross-sectional study of the effects of LASEAN and CACM
on Latin American trade, Journal of Common Market Studies, 11, pp. 326-336.
Anderson, J., van Wincoop, E., 2003. “Gravity with Gravitas: a solution to the border puzzle”,
American Economic Review, 93 (1), pp. 170-192.
Andrews, M., Schank, T., Upward, R., 2006. Practical fixed effects estimation methods for the
three-way error components model, The Stata Journal, 6(4), pp. 461-481.
Baier, S.L., Bergstrand, J.H., 2002. “On the endogeneity of international trade flows and free
trade agreements”, Manuscript, August 2002,
Baier, S.L., Bergstrand, J.H., 2004. “Economic determinants of free trade agreements”, Journal
of International Economics, 64, pp. 29-63.
*Baier, S.L., Bergstrand, J.H., 2007. “Do free trade agreements actually increase members’
international trade?”, Journal of International Economics, 71, pp. 72-95.
Baldwin, R., 1995a. “A domino theory of regionalism”, in: Balwin, R., Haaparanta, P., Kiander,
J., eds., Expanding membership of the European Union, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Baldwin, R., 1995b. “The Eastern Enlargement of the European Union”, European Economic
Review, 39 (3-4), pp. 474-481.
Baldwin, R., 1997. “The Causes of Regionalism”, World Economy, 20 (7), pp. 865-888.
Baldwin, R., 2005. “The euro’s trade effects”, Working Paper prepared for ECB Workshop
“What effects is EMU having on the euro area and its member countries?”, Frankfurt 16 June
2005.
*Baldwin, R., Taglioni, D., 2006. “Gravity for Dummies and Dummies for Gravity Equations”,
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12516.
*Baxter, M., Kouparitsas, M.A., 2006. “What determines Bilateral Trade Flows?”, National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12188.
Bhagwati, J., Panagariya, A., 1996. “Preferential Trading Areas and Multilateralism: Strangers,
Friends or Foes?”, in: Bhagwati, J., Panagariya, A., eds., The Economics of Preferential
Trade Agreements, AEI Press, Washington, D.C.
*Bergstrand, J., 1985. “The gravity equation in international trade: some microeconomic
foundation and empirical evidence”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 67, pp. 474481.
Bond, E.W., Syropoulos, C., 1996. “The size of trading blocs, market power and world welfare
effects”, Journal of International Economics, 40 (3), pp. 411-437.
*Brada, J., Mendez, J., 1988. “Exchange rate risk, exchange rate regime and the volume of
international trade”, Kyklos, 41, pp. 263–280.
Brun, J., Carrere, C., Guillaumont, P., de Melo, J., 2005. “Has Distance Died? Evidence from a
Panel Gravity Model”, World Bank Economic Review, 19 (1), pp. 99-120.
*Carrere, C., 2006. “Revisiting the effects of regional trade agreements on trade flows with
proper specification of the gravity model”, European Economic Review, 50, pp. 223-247.

18

Chen, Y.C., Rogoff, K., 2006. “Commodity Currencies and Exchange Rate Predictability: A
Bayesian Model Averaging Approach”, Mimeo, University of Washington.
*Cheng, I., Wall, H.J., 2005. “Controlling for Heterogeneity in Gravity Models of Trade and
Integration”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 87 (1), pp. 49-63.
Clark, P., Tamirisa, N., Wei, S.J., Sadikov, A., Zeng, L., 2004. “Exchange Rate Volatility and
Trade Flows - Some New Evidence”, Working Paper, International Monetary Fund.
*Coe, D., Hoffmaister, A., 1999. “North-South trade: is Africa unusual”, Journal of African
Economies, 8, pp. 228-256.
Davis, D.R., 1995. “Intra-industry Trade: A Heckscher-Ohlin-Ricardo Approach”, Journal of
International Economics, 39, pp. 201-226.
Deardorff, A.V., 1998. “Determinants of bilateral trade: does gravity work in a classical world”,
in: Frankel, J. (Ed.), The Preferentialization of the World Economy. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, pp. 7 –22.
Deardorff, A.V., Stern, R., 1994. “Multilateral Trade Negotiations and Preferential Trade
Agreements”, in: Deardorff, A.V., Stern, R., eds., Analytical and Negotiating Issues in the
Global Trading System, University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI.
*Eichengreen, B., Irwin, D., 1996. “The Role of History in Bilateral Trade Flows”, National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 5565.
Eicher, T.S., Papageorgiou, C., Raftery, A.E., 2007. “Evaluating the Impact of Priors in
Economic Applications of Bayesian Model Averaging”, Working Paper, University of
Washington.
Eicher, T.S., Papageorgiou, C., Roehn, O., 2007. “Unravelling the Fortunes of the Fortunate: An
Iterative Bayesian Model Averaging (IBMA) Approach”, Journal of Macroeconomics,
forthcoming.
*Egger, P., 2000. “A note on the proper econometric specification of the gravity equation”,
Economics Letters, 66, pp. 25-31.
*Egger, P., Pfaffermayr, M., 2003. “The proper panel econometric specification of the gravity
equation: A three-way model with bilateral interaction effects”, Empirical Economics, 28,
pp. 571-580.
Fernandez, C., Ley, E., Steel, M., 2001a. “Model Uncertainty in Cross-Country Growth
Regressions,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 16, pp. 563-576.
Fernandez, C., Ley, E., Steel, M., 2001b, “Benchmark Priors for Bayesian Model Averaging,”
Journal of Econometrics, 100, pp. 381-427.
Feenstra, R., 2003. Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence. Princeton University
Press, New Jersey, USA.
*Feenstra, R.C., Markusen, J.R., Rose, A.K., 2001. ““Using the Gravity Equation to
Differentiate among Alternative Theories of Trade”, Canadian Journal of Economics, 34 (2),
pp. 430-477.
*Frankel, J., 1992. “Is Japan Creating a Yen Bloc in East Asia and the Pacific?”, National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4050.
Frankel, J., 1997. Preferential Trading Blocs in the World Trading System, Institute for
International Economics, Washington, D.C.
Frankel, J., Romer, D., 1999. “Does trade cause growth?” American Economic Review, 89, pp.
379–399.
Frankel, J., Rose, A.K., 1998. “The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency Area Criteria”,
Economic Journal, 108, pp. 1009-1025.

19

*Frankel, J., Rose, A.K., 2002. “An estimate of the effect of common currencies on trade and
income”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, pp. 437–466.
*Frankel, J., Stein, E., Wei, S.J., 1995. “Trading blocs and the Americas: the natural, the
unnatural and the supernatural?” Journal of Development Economics, 47, pp. 61-95.
*Frankel, J., Wei, S.J., 1993. “Trading Blocs and Currency Blocs”, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 4335.
*Frankel, J., Wei, S.J., 1996. “ASEAN in a Regional Perspective”, Pacific Basin Working Paper
No. PB96-02.
*Freund, C., 2000. “Different paths from free trade: the gains from regionalism”, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 115, pp. 1317–1341.
Ghosh, S., Yamarik, S., 2004. “Are preferential trade agreements trade creating? An application
of extreme bounds analysis”, Journal of International Economics, 63, pp. 369-395.
Glick, R., Rose, A.K., 2002. “Does a currency union affect trade? The time-series evidence”,
European Economic Review, 46, pp. 1125-1151.
Greene, W.H., 2003. Econometric Analysis, 5th Edition, Prentice-Hall, Princeton, NJ.
Grossman, G.M., Helpman, E., 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
Cambridge, MIT Press.
Grossman, G.M., Helpman, E., 1995. “The Politics of Free-Trade Agreements”, American
Economic Review, 85 (4), pp. 667-690.
Hansen, B.E., 2007. ”Least Squares Model Averaging," Econometrica, forthcoming.
Haveman, J.D., 1996. “Some Welfare Effects of Sequential Customs Union Formation”,
Canadian Journal of Economics, 29 (4), pp. 941-958.
Helpman, E., Krugman, P.R., 1985. Market Structure and Foreign Trade, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Hendry, D., 1995. Dynamic Econometrics, Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Hjort, N.L., Claeskens, G., 2003. “Frequentist Model Average Estimators”, Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 98 (464), pp. 879-899.
Hummels, D., Levinsohn, J., 1995. “Monopolistic Competition and International Trade:
Reconsidering the Evidence”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110 (3), pp. 799-836.
Jeffries, H., 1961. Theory of Probability, 3rd Edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Kass, R.E., Raftery, A.E., 1995. “Bayes Factors”, Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 90 (430), pp. 773-795.
Kemp, M.C., Wan, H.Y., 1976. “An Elementary Proposition Concerning the Formation of
Customs Unions”, Journal of International Economics, 6, pp. 95-97.
Krishna, P., 1998. “Regionalism and Multilateralism: A Political Economy Approach”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (1), pp. 227-251.
Krugman, P., 1991a. “Is bilateralism bad?”, in: Helpman, E., Razin, A., eds, International trade
and trade policy, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Krugman, P., 1991b. “The move toward free trade zones”, in: Policy Implications of Trade and
Currency Zones, A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
Jackson Hole, WY, Aug., pp. 7-42.
Linnemann, H., 1966. An Econometric Study of International Trade Flows, North Holland,
Amsterdam.
Leamer, E.E., 1978. Specification Searches, J. Wiley, New York, NY.
Leamer, E.E., 1983, “Let's Take the Con Out of Econometrics”, American Economic Review, 73,
pp. 31-43.

20

Levy, P.I., 1996. “Free Trade Agreements and Inter-Bloc Tariffs”, Mimeo, Yale University.
Levy, P.I., 1997. “A Political-Economic Analysis of Free Trade Agreements”, American
Economic Review, 87 (4), pp. 506-519.
Linder, S.B., 1961. An Essay on Trade and Transformation, John Wiley, New York.
Magee, C., 2003. “Endogenous preferential trade agreements: an empirical analysis”,
Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy, 2 (1), Berkeley Electronic Press.
Matyas, L., 1997. “Proper Econometric Specification of the Gravity Model”, World Economy, 20
(3), pp. 363-368.
*Montenegro, C., Soto, R., 1996. “How distorted is Cuba’s trade? Evidence and predictions from
a gravity model”, Journal of International Trade and Economic Development, 5, pp. 45-70.
Panagariya, A., 1999. “The Regionalism Debate: An Overview”, World Economy, 22 (4), pp.
280-301.
Panagariya, A., 2000. “Preferential Trade Liberalization: The Traditional Theory and New
Developments”, Journal of Economic Literature, 38 (2), pp. 287-331.
Panagariya, A., Findlay, R., 1996. “A Political Economy Analysis of Free Trade Areas and
Customs Unions”, in: Feenstra, R., Irwin, D., Grossman, G., eds., The political economy of
trade reform, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Pollak, J.J., 1996. “Is APEC a Natural Regional Trading Bloc? A Critique of the ‘Gravity Model’
of International Trade”, World Economy, pp. 533-543.
Raftery, A.E., D. Madigan and J.A. Hoeting, 1997, "Bayesian Model Averaging for Linear
Regression Models," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92, pp. 179-191.
Raftery, A.E., Zheng, Y., 2002. Long-Run Performance of Bayesian Model Averaging, Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 98, pp. 931-937.
Raftery, A.E., Zheng, Y., 2003. “Discussion: Performance of Bayesian Model Averaging”,
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 98 (464), Theory and Methods, pp. 931-938.
Redding, S., Venables, A.J., 2004. “Economic Geography and International Inequality”, Journal
of International Economics, 62 (1), pp. 53-82.
Richardson, M., 1993. “Endogenous Protection and Trade Diversion”, Journal of International
Economics, 34 (3-4), pp. 309-324.
Rivera-Batiz, L.A., Romer, P.M., 1991. “Economic Integration and Endogenous Growth”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106 (2), pp. 531-555.
*Rose, A.K., 2000. One money, one market? The Effects of Common Currencies on
International Trade”, Economic Policy,15, pp. 7-46.
Rose, A.K., 2004. “Do We Really Know That the WTO Increases Trade?”, American Economic
Review, 13 (4), pp. 682-698.
Rose, A.K., van Wincoop, E., 2001. “National Money as a Barrier to International Trade: The
Real Case for a Currency Union”, American Economic Review, 91 (2), pp. 386-390.
Sala-i-Martin, X.G., 1997. “I Just Ran Two Million Regressions,” American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings, 87, pp.178-183.
Sala-i-Martin, X.G., Doppelhofer, G., Miller, R., 2004. “Determinants of Long-Term Growth: A
Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) Approach,” American Economic
Review, 94, pp. 813-835.
Splimbergo, A., Stein, E., 1996. “The Welfare Implications of Trading Blocs among Countries
with Different Endowments”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
5472.

21

*Soloaga, I., Winters, L.A., 2001. “Preferentialism in the nineties: what effect on trade?” North
American Journal of Economics and Finance, 12, pp. 1-29.
Subramanian, A., Wei, S.J., 2007. “The WTO Promotes Trade, Strongly But Unevenly”, Journal
of International Economics, forthcoming.
Syropoulos, C., 1999. “Customs Unions and Comparative Advantage”, Oxford Economic
Papers, 51 (2), pp. 239-266.
Tenreyro, S., Barro, R.J., 2002. “Economic effects of currency unions”, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 9435.
*Thursby, J., Thursby, M., 1987. “Bilateral trade flows, the Linder hypothesis, and exchange
risk”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 69, pp. 488-495.
Viner, J., 1950. The Customs Union Issue, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, New
York.
*Wei, S.J., 1996. “Intra-national versus International Trade: How Stubborn are Nations in Global
Integration?”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 5531.
*Wei, S.J., Frankel, J., 1998. “Open Regionalism in World of Continental Trade Blocs”, IMF
Staff Papers, 45 (3), pp. 440-453.
*Wei, S.J., Zhang, Z., 2006. “Collateral Damage: Exchange Controls and International Trade”,
Working Paper, International Monetary Fund.
Wright, J.H., 2003. “Bayesian Model Averaging and Exchange Rate Forecasts”, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System Discussion Paper 779.

22

Table 1
Preferential Trading Arrangements
Abbreviation

Name of PTA

Start

Member countries (year joined)

ANZCERTA

Australia – New Zealand
Closer Economic
Relations Trade
Agreement
Asia Pacific Economic
Community

1983

Australia, New Zealand

1989

Andean Community /
Andean Pact
Association of South
East Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Free Trade
Area
Central American
Common Market
Caribbean Community/
Carifta

1969

Australia, Brunei, Canada, China (1991), Chile (1994),
Taiwan (1991), Hong Kong (1991), Indonesia, Japan, South
Korea, Malaysia, Mexico (1993), New Zealand, Papua New
Guinea (1993), Peru (1998), Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand, United States, Vietnam (1998).
Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Venezuela (1973),
Former: Chile (1969-76)
Brunei (1984), Cambodia (1998), Indonesia, Laos (1997),
Malaysia, Myanmar (1997), the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand, Vietnam (1995).

EEA

European Economic
Area

1994

EFTA

European Free Trade
Association

1960

EU

European Union

1958

LAIA/LAFTA

Latin America
Integration Agreement

1960

APEC

AP
AFTA

CACM
CARICOM

1967

1960
1968

Costa Rica (1963), El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Nicaragua.
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas (1983), Barbados, Belize
(1995), Dominica (1974), Guyana (1973), Grenada (1974),
Jamaica, Montserrat (1974), St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia
(1974), St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname (1995),
Trinidad and Tobago.
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Luxembourg, Iceland, Italy, Ireland, Liechtenstein,
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United
Kingdom.
Iceland, Liechtenstein (1991), Norway (1986), Switzerland
Former: Denmark (1960-72), United Kingdom (1960-72),
Portugal (1960-85), Austria (1960-94), Sweden (1960-94),
Finland (1986-94).
Austria (1995), Belgium, Denmark (1973), Finland (1995),
France, Germany, Greece (1981), Luxembourg, Ireland
(1973), Italy, Netherlands, Portugal (1986), Spain (1986),
Sweden (1995), United Kingdom (1973).
Argentina, Bolivia (1967), Brazil, Chile, Colombia (1961)
Ecuador (1961), Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay,
Venezuela (1966).
Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay

Southern Cone Common 1991
Market
Canada-US Free Trade
1988
Canada, United States, Mexico (1994).
NAFTA
Arrangement / North
America Free Trade
Agreement
Table 1 is based on Ghosh and Yamarik (2004), it includes corrections to some of the original PTA coding: ASEAN,
which is no free trade area was changed to AFTA with AFTA membership starting in 1995 instead of 1980. For the
Andean Pact, Chile had to be excluded post-1976, when it left the AP. Finally, CARICOM membership for Guyana is
corrected to start in 1973 (instead of 1995). The corrections do not alter the qualitative results.
MERCOSUR

23

Table 2: Common Gravity Model Controls, Their Estimated Relationship with Bilateral
Trade In Past Studies and Variable Description

Trade
Creation

Trade
Diversion /
Open Bloc

Core
Gravity
Economic
Policy
Variables
Dev’t Factor
Endowment

Geography

Historical
Ties

AFTAij
ANZCERTAij
APECij
APij
CACMij
CARICOMij
EEAij
EFTAij
EUij
LAIAij
MERCOSURij
NAFTAij
AFTAi
ANZCERTAi
APECj
APj
CACMj
CARICOMi
EEAi
EFTAi
EUi
LAIAi
MERCOSURi
NAFTAi
log(DISTANCEij)
log(GDPi GDPj)
log(gdpi gdpj)
SACHSi+SACHSj
CUij
FLOATij

Est. relationship, past studies
Positive
None
Negative
3
2
1
3
3
2
4
2

Variable Description

0-1 Dummies
(1 if the two countries are contemporaneous member in
the respective PTA; 0 otherwise).

3
9
4
2
1
2

1
2

1
23
9
1
3
1

5
9
2
3
3
1

1

1
2

2
2

1
1
2
2
2
1
2
1

2
2
1
23
1
2

Nat. log of the bilateral distance b/w two capital cities
Nat. log of the product of real GDP
Nat. log of the product of real GDP per capita
Sum of Sachs-Warner index of open trade policy (0,1,2)

1

0-1 Dummy (1 if the two share a common currency)

1

VOLATILITYij

1

1

4

abs(gdp_DIFF)
abs(DENS_DIFF)

3
1

1
1

1

Number of countries with a floating exchange rate (0,1,2)
The standard deviation of the 1st difference in the
bilateral real exchange rate during the previous 5 years
The absolute log difference of real GDP per capita
The absolute log difference in population density
The absolute log difference in average years of secondary
schooling in the 25+ population
0-1 Dummy (1 if the two share a common land border)

1

abs(SCHOOL_DIFF)

0-1 Dummies
(1 if one and only one of the countries is a
contemporaneous member in the respective PTA; 0
otherwise).

BORDERij

19

5

REMOTEij

4

3

LANDLOCKij
log(AREAi AREAj)
ISLANDij
COMLANGij
COMCOLij
COLONYij

3
4
3
12
3
5

2

2

1
1

1
1

Product of average distance of each country from all
trading partners other than the other country
Number of landlocked countries (0,1,2)
Number of island countries (0,1,2)
Nat. log of the product of the two countries’ surface areas
0-1 Dummy (1 if the two share a common language)
0-1 Dummy (1 if the two share a common colonizer)

2

0-1 Dummy (1 if one was a former colony of the other)
Notes: Studies that have been used in the construction of this table are highlighted by a star in our list of references. Following Ghosh and Yamarik (2004),
from whom parts of this Table are adapted, an estimated relationship is reported positive or negative when a paper reports the coefficient significant at the
1% level. One paper may have multiple entries for the same regressor, if different regressions in the paper yield different relationships. Please refer to the
Appendix of Ghosh and Yamarik (2004) for more detailed variable descriptions and a list of the countries in our sample.

24

Table 3: PTA Trade Creation and Trade Diversion
Specification 1

Specification 2

Time Fixed Effects

Trade
Creation

Trade
Diversion,
Open Bloc

Core Gravity

Economic
Policy
Development,
Factor
Endowment

Geography

History

AFTAijt
ANZCERTAijt
APECijt
APijt
CACMijt
CARICOMijt
EEAijt
EFTAijt
EUijt
LAIAijt
MERCOSURijt
NAFTAijt
AFTAit
ANZCERTAit
APECit
APit
CACMit
CARICOMit
EEAit
EFTAit
EUit
LAIAit
MERCOSURit
NAFTAit
log(DISTANCEij)
log(GDPit GDPjt)
log(gdpit gdpjt)
SACHSit+SACHSjt
CUijt
FLOATijt
VOLATILITYijt
abs(gdp_DIFF)
abs(DENS_DIFF)
abs(SCHOOL_DIFF)
BORDERij
REMOTEij
LANDLOCKij
log(AREAi AREAj)
ISLANDij
COMLANGij
COMCOLij
COLONYij

Post.
Incl.
Prob.
0.00
0.01
1.00
0.01
1.00
1.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.91
0.12
0.01
0.03
1.00
1.00
0.52
0.85
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.79
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.25
1.00
1.00
0.01
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.92
0.02
1.00
1.00
1.00

Post.
Mean
-0.22
0.89
1.48***
-0.05
2.25***
2.08***
0.26
0.02
0.03
0.46***
1.66
-0.89
0.17
-0.47***
0.55***
-0.19*
-0.18**
-0.74***
0.01
0.35***
0.56***
-0.40***
0.42**
-0.63***
-1.19***
0.88***
0.55***
0.35***
1.40***
-0.01
0.006
0.18***
0.23***
0.02
0.53***
342***
-0.42***
-0.03**
-0.05
0.47***
0.77***
1.44***

Post.
Std.
Dev.
0.54
0.96
0.15
0.27
0.23
0.41
0.19
0.26
0.14
0.13
0.70
0.84
0.11
0.10
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.07
0.08
0.05
0.04
0.07
0.12
0.10
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.29
0.02
0.002
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.10
39.79
0.04
0.01
0.03
0.05
0.07
0.12

Post
Mean
in %
-20%
144%
338%
-5%
848%
702%
29%
2%
3%
58%
424%
-59%
19%
-37%
73%
-17%
-17%
-52%
1%
43%
75%
-33%
52%
-47%
-1%
1%
1%
42%
307%
-1%
0%
0%
0%
0%
69%
342%
-34%
0%
-5%
60%
116%
320%

Time & Country-Pair Fixed
Effects
Post.
Post.
Post.
Post
Incl.
Mean
Std. Mean
Prob.
Dev.
in %
0.00
-0.22
0.39
-19%
0.00
0.30
0.92
35%
0.01
0.14
0.12
16%
0.02
0.56
0.37
74%
0%
0.00
0.12
0.71
13%
0.00
0.06
0.17
6%
0.03
0.52
0.32
69%
1.00 0.66***
0.17
93%
0%
0.00
0.37
0.51
45%
0.00
0.60
0.65
81%
1.00 0.40***
0.08
49%
0.10
-0.18
0.09
-17%
1.00 0.23***
0.05
26%
0.03
-0.17
0.10
-15%
0%
0.39
-0.29
0.11
-25%
0.20
-0.14
0.06
-13%
0.98
0.26**
0.08
29%
0.21
0.16
0.07
17%
0%
0.01
0.11
0.09
11%
0.99 -0.31***
0.08
-26%
0%
0.05
1.00 1.13***
1%
0.10
0.02
0.16
0%
1.00 0.13***
0.03
14%
0.01
-0.64
0.67
-47%
0.20
-0.05
0.02
-5%
0.01
-0.002 0.002
0%
1.00 -0.31***
0.05
0%
0.75
0.25**
0.09
0%
0.03
-0.06
0.04
0%

Notes: Fixed Effect coefficients are omitted. *, **, *** indicate 50, 75, 99 percent inclusion probabilities roughly akin to ratios of the posterior mean to
standard deviation of 1, 1.9, 2.3. For calculations of implied percentage changes see Table 4a

25

Table 4:
Trade Creation and Diversion among Trading Partners
(After Controlling for Natural Trading Partners / Country-Pair Fixed Effects)
NAFTA

ANZCERTA

AFTA

APEC*

EU

EFTA

0%

NAFTA
ANZCERTA

-26%

0%

AFTA

10%

49%

0%

APEC*

-26%

0%

49%

0%

EU

-7%

0%

87%

26%

93%

EFTA

20%

63%

142%

63%

29%

0%

Rest of the World

-7%

26%

87%

26%

0%

29%

Source: Table 3. *APEC refers only to APEC members that are not in NAFTA, ANZCERTA, or AFTA (Brunei,
Japan, South Korea, China, Chile, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Papua New Guinea, for relevant years). For all other APEC
countries, the AFTAijt coefficient applies. For regressors with P(β k ≠ 0 | d ) ≤ 50 , we assume β k = 0 . Equations
for calculations are shown in Table 4a.

Table 4a:
Calculation of Trade Flows Among and Within PTAs
Trading Partner 1
PTA 1

Trading Partner 2

Net Trade Effect
(1 + β RTAi ) − 1

PTA 1

PTA 1

(1 + β RTAij ) − 1

PTA 1

PTA 2

(1 + β RTAi1 ) * (1 + β RTAi2 ) − 1
(1 + β RTAi1 ) * (1 + β RTAi2 ) − 1

PTA 1, PTA 2
PTA 1, PTA 2

PTA 1

(1 + β RTAij1 ) * (1 + β RTAi 2 ) − 1

PTA 1, PTA 2

PTA 3

(1 + β RTAi1 ) * (1 + β RTAi2 ) * (1 + β RTAi3 ) − 1

26

