In Search of a Sulphur Dioxide Environmental Kuznets Curve:
A Bayesian Model Averaging Approach*
Jeffrey Begun
University of Washington
Theo S. Eicher
University of Washington
Working Paper no. 79
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
University of Washington
June 15 2007

In Search of a Sulphur Dioxide Environmental Kuznets Curve:
A Bayesian Model Averaging Approach*
Jeffrey Begun
University of Washington
Theo S. Eicher
University of Washington

Abstract
The exact specification and motivation of the Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC) is the subject of a vast
literature in environmental economics. A remarkably diverse set of econometric approaches has been
employed to support or reject a specific relationship between environmental quality and pollution.
Nevertheless, methods employed to date have not addressed the issue of model uncertainty, given that a
sizable number of competing theories exist that can explain the income/pollution relationship.
We introduce Bayesian Model Averaging to the EKC analysis to examine a) whether a sulphur dioxide
EKC exists, and if so, b) which income/pollution specification is most strongly supported by the data. We
find only weak support for an EKC, which disappears altogether when we address oversampling issues in
the data. In contrast, our results highlight the relative importance of political economy and site-specific
variables in explaining pollution outcomes. Trade is also shown to play an important indirect role. It
moderates the influence of the composition effect on pollution. Our findings run contrary to the
deterministic view of the income/pollution relationship that is persistent in the literature.

Keywords, Environmental Kuznets Curve, Bayesian Model Averaging.
JEL Classification: Q53, C11, O40

*We thank Werner Antweiler and Bill Harbaugh for sharing their data and Chris Papageorgiou for comments.

2

I. Introduction
A vast empirical literature has sought to establish a robust relationship between economic
development and environmental quality. Grossman and Krueger (1995) and Selden and Song
(1994) examined the relationship and documented an inverted U-shaped curve between income
and pollution that is similar to the inverted U-shaped relationship between income and inequality
first proposed by Kuznets (1955). The early data seemed to support an “environmental Kuznets
curve” (EKC) where initial phases of development are associated with increasing pollution while
richer nations experience improvements in their environmental quality.
Subsequently, however, a large number of authors have failed to confirm the EKC –
either in the original Grossman and Krueger dataset or in updated and expanded pollution
datasets (see, e.g., Harbaugh et al., 2002, or Deacon and Norman, 2006). The conflicting
empirical results have given rise to intense attempts either to formally model the EKC process
(see e.g., Antweiler et al., 2001), or to add further control variables to reduced-form regressions
to examine whether the EKC relationship can be resurrected and/or remain robust when the
model is correctly specified (see, e.g., Panatayotou, 1997).
The EKC is a case study of extreme model uncertainty where the true model is unknown
and several competing approaches exist to formalize the relationship between environmental
quality and income. In light of such model uncertainty, inference procedures based on only one
regression model overstate the precision of coefficient estimates since the uncertainty
surrounding the validity of a theory has not been taken into account (see Doppelhofer, 2005).
The problem is particularly prevalent in the EKC literature since a number of well-founded
approaches exist and researchers face an abundance of possible candidate regressors.
Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA) allows inferences to be based on a number of
competing models, each weighted by its quality. The procedure naturally delivers a posterior
distribution for each candidate regressor, whose mean is a smoothed estimate derived from all
relevant models. Hundreds of BMA papers have been published in the last decade as increases in
computing power allow end users to trawl through thousands of models mechanically in attempts
to address model uncertainty. In environmental economics, prominent examples of BMA
applications include the modeling of population determinants for deer and fish in Farnsworth et
al. (2006) and Fernandez, Ley and Steel (2002), respectively. To our knowledge, we are the first

3

to apply Bayesian Model Averaging to resolve the model uncertainty surrounding the EKC
relationship.
Our strategy is to group EKC approaches into two categories. First we examine reducedform approaches to the EKC, where many possible determinants of pollution are tested. Then
we examine specific theories that have been proposed as the underlying determinants of an EKC,
and scrutinize how strongly the data supports theory-based candidate regressors. Before we
summarize our results, it is important to note that the updated S02 data that has been extended
and cleaned of previous errors no longer exhibits the EKC relationship that Grossman and
Krueger (1995) discovered (see, e.g., Harbaugh et al., 2002). Hence our results below can be
seen as an effort to find robust evidence for an EKC in this dataset by eliminating possible
omitted variable bias.
We find only limited evidence for an income/pollution relationship once we account for
model uncertainty in the data. Instead, robust and strongly related regressors in both reducedform and theory-based approaches are those relating to political economy, site-specific effect,s
and trade-induced composition effects. Societies that are more open in terms of political
participation are shown to exhibit significantly lower air pollution.
The theory-based approach highlights that the exact theoretical specification of the trade
effect on pollution matters. Following Antweiler et al. (2001), we show that the interaction
between trade and capital intensity is of crucial importance to explain the evolution of SO2
concentrations across countries and time. We also show that the composition effect has a
different impact on countries depending on their level of development. The greater the level of
development – as proxied by the human capital augmented capital-labor ratio – the lower the
implied concentrations for open economies. We also find support for pollution havens, since the
negative coefficient implies that countries with low capital intensity and high trade orientations
have higher pollution levels (see Birdsall and Wheeler, 1993).
It is important to note that the number of regressors that are robustly related to pollution
in the BMA approach, as well as the best model identified by BMA, contains only a fraction of
the 23 possible candidate regressors and only about one third of the 18 regressors suggested by
the most comprehensive theoretical specification in Antweiler et al. (2001). This provides
evidence that such a complex theory may not be necessary and alternative theories, such as the

4

Green Solow model, should not be discarded simply because they rely on only a fraction of the
regressors that Antweiler et al. (2001) introduced (see Taylor and Brock, 2003). Not only is the
number of robustly related regressors in BMA smaller than previous approaches suggested,
several are also not exclusively related to economic fundamentals.
Nevertheless, the best model suggested by BMA, which accounts for model uncertainty,
has an R-squared of 0.242 at the most disaggregated level, which is twice as high as Antweiler et
al.’s (2001) preferred full fixed-effects specification (R2 = 0.15).

Indeed, the best model

identified in our preferred specification, which also addresses the severe oversampling issues in
the data, features an R-squared of 0.514. This implies that the significance of the large number of
regressors in previous theory-based and reduced-form regressions may be an artifact of an
approach that did not take into account model uncertainty.
2)

The SO2 EKC

2.1)

Data Considerations

Perhaps the most salient EKC relationship in the literature is between air quality and
development.1 In this paper we focus on median sulphur dioxide (SO2) concentration data from
the Global Environmental Monitoring System (GEMS) to search for an EKC. The data is
updated, error-corrected and maintained by the EPA in its Aerometric Information Retrieval
System (AIRS).2 The GEMS/AIRS data is perhaps the most widely used dataset to investigate
the EKC, with reported SO2 concentrations from stations in up to 44 countries from 1971 to
2006.3 However, most of the data since the early 1990s exists only for the United States.
Our income measure is real GDP per capita in constant 1996 dollars from the Penn World
Tables 6.1 (Heston, Summers and Aten, 2002). In a later section when we compare results to
Antweiler et al. (2001, subsequently referred to as ACT), we also use their GNP data as an
income measure. We use concentration data, although emissions data is also widely available,

1

Alternative measures have been used. Evidence for an EKC has been found for water quality (Grossman and
Krueger, 1995), deforestation (Cropper and Griffith, 1994; Panayotou, 1995) and water withdrawal for agriculture
(Rock, 1998; Goklany, 2002). Some researchers have found an EKC for carbon dioxide (Roberts and Grimes, 1997)
though others have found that CO2 increases monotonically with income (Shafik and Bandyopadhyay, 1992).
2
Our raw GEMS/AIRS data is identical to Antweiler, Copeland and Taylor (2001), who kindly shared their data that
includes median concentrations.
3
See, for example, Grossman and Krueger (1995), Panayotou (1997), Torras and Boyce (1998), Barrett and Graddy
(2000), Harbaugh et al. (2002) and Deacon and Norman (2006).

5

because it is the concentration of SO2 in the atmosphere that matters for the environmental
impact.
The SO2 data is, however, highly unbalanced in two dimensions: location and time. Few
countries report data over the entire time period, and many countries report pollution
concentrations for less than a decade. Often entire years of data are missing between
observations not only on the station level, but also on the city and country level. Even in
countries with extensive locational coverage, such as the United States, the time series for each
monitoring station is highly unbalanced.
The data are unbalanced in terms of location since a few countries are represented with
large numbers of reporting stations, while many other nations feature only one. A full 38 percent
of the original 2,555 station-level observations originate in the U.S. and Canada. The imbalance
is exacerbated early and late in the sample as the U.S. supplies 69 percent of the data before 1974
and after 1993. Therefore we restrict our analysis to 1994-1993, which reduces the dataset by
219 mostly U.S. observations. The literature has largely been concerned with documenting the
EKC (or the absence thereof) without acknowledging the fact that the dataset is so extremely
unbalanced. In Section 2.2 we discuss measures to balance the sample, which require us to drop
seven countries with a total of 128 observations because they lacked either SO2 or PWT 6.1 for
at least two five-year periods.4 Finally, we had to drop Hong Kong (40 observations) because it
lacked the Polity IV data described below, and Yugoslavia was dropped by ACT because it lacks
human capital data. Figure 1 provides a breakdown of the 2168 observations by country of
origin.
2.2

The EKC in the Raw Income Pollution Data

As mentioned in section 2.1, we employ the same GEMS dataset for income and sulphur dioxide
pollution that has been used extensively in the previous literature. Starting with the very first
paper by Grossman and Krueger (1991) and continuing on to perhaps the most prominent recent
work on the income/pollution relationship by ACT, this dataset has been the cornerstone of EKC
support. The first surprise for researchers using the newest version of GEMS, which has been
purged of errors and extended to include updated data, is that it no longer provides evidence for
4

These countries (and their number of observations) are Austria (2), Kenya (4), Switzerland (2), Ghana (3), Czech
Republic (21), Poland (86) and Iraq (9). Iraq and Poland are excluded only when we use GDP measures. A complete
description of the data used in this paper is provided in the appendix.

6

the fundamental EKC relationship. Figure 2 plots the raw data for every station in every year
that an observation is recorded. In addition, the figure traces the predicted values from the most
fundamental regression that includes only log SO2 concentrations as the dependent variable and
real GDP per capita as a third-order polynomial.5 In Grossman and Krueger (1995), a similar plot
was prominently inverted-U shaped.
Instead of an EKC, the updated GEMS data in Figure 2 shows a simple relationship
between development and environmental quality that has SO2 concentrations gradually declining
with income. The lack of an EKC in the raw SO2 data has previously been noticed by astute
researchers who suggested that global data masks country-level phenomena. Deacon and
Norman (2006) provide strong evidence that the country-level experience may in fact look very
different from the global station-level data. Since technology, factor abundance and the political
response to interest groups are also national concepts, we aggregate the data in search of an EKC
at the individual country level. Figure 3 confirms Deacon and Norman’s (2006) results by
plotting country-level SO2 concentrations over time and showing that most countries’ SO2
concentrations do not follow an EKC path. In fact, it is difficult to discern any country in Figure
3 that exhibits the single peak predicted by the EKC hypothesis. Indeed, Deacon and Norman
(2006) show that diverse SO2–income relationships exist among countries; depending on the
nation, rising income may be associated with rising, falling or stable SO2 concentrations.
The lack of an EKC at the station or individual country level might be an artifact of the
extremely unbalanced time- and location-dimensions of the dataset. Since our main explanatory
variable, real GDP per capita, is defined at the country level, oversampling in countries with
multiple reporting stations may bias the station-level regressions severely. To balance the
sample, we follow Selden and Song (1994) and take five-year averages that correct for much of
the time and locational imbalances discussed in Section 2.1. In the averaged dataset, the U.S.
prominence is reduced to 24 percent of the observations at the station-level. Therefore, averaging
helps address our oversampling concerns, and in the country-level data the entire locational
5

We employ fixed-effects regressions throughout. It has been argued that the random effects EKC cannot be
estimated consistently (Mundlak, 1978; Hsiao, 1986; Stern, 2003). Since the very premise of the EKC is that
specific local, regional or national characteristics are crucial, the random-effects approach suffers from
inconsistency due to omitted variables. In addition, we have no desire to imply that a possible EKC in our data holds
beyond the countries in this sample. Hence, we take the view that countries represented are not simply random
draws from a larger EKC country/station population. An additional advantage of the fixed-effects approach is that it
controls for many time-invariant, site-specific and country-specific factors.

7

imbalance that leads to oversampling concerns is eliminated. Averaging data over five-year
intervals is also common in the economic growth literature and allows us to address the error
associated with business cycle fluctuations that are inherent in income data (see Barro, 1990).
Nevertheless, we will continue to examine and report results for all three levels of aggregation.
Averaging across time and aggregating by country does not resolve the mystery of the
missing EKC in the raw data, however. Plotting the station-level data and the predicted values
obtained by the same method as in Figure 2, the country-level data in Figure 4 maintains the
negative relationship between pollution and income. The monotonic decline is a bit surprising
given past support for an EKC in the GEMS data (e.g., Shafik, 1994; Grossman and Krueger,
1995; Torras and Boyce, 1996; Panayotou, 1997). A careful study by Harbaugh, Levinson and
Wilson (2002) with the revised GEMS/AIRS data, however, found evidence that sulphur dioxide
concentrations may initially decline as income rises. In addition, Perman and Stern (2003), who
use the same data and make adjustments for previous methodological and data problems with
appropriate statistical techniques, also found no EKC evidence. Given the heterogeneity
observed in Figure 3, and the results of Deacon and Norman (2006), our station-level results are
not surprising.
3.

Model Uncertainty in the Income / Environment Relationship
Two simple explanations can address the absence of an EKC in the raw data presented in

Figures 2 and 4. Either the relationship does not exist, or the model is misspecified. By
neglecting to include crucial covariates, the misspecification due to omitted variable bias may
overwhelm the power of the GDP regressors. Perhaps in an effort to explore the latter line of
reasoning, the literature features a remarkably diverse range of different model specifications to
uncover evidence in favor of an EKC.
Below, we first focus on the most prominent reduced-form approaches that commonly
include variables to sharpen the EKC model specification such as international trade, capital
intensity, precipitation variation, temperature, population density, investment, education,
institutions, and interaction terms. Instead of juxtaposing various versions of different
researchers’ preferred models as is standard in robustness analysis, we use an advanced model
selection technique to address the model uncertainty inherent in the EKC literature. Bayesian
Model Averaging (BMA) is the most sophisticated and theoretically grounded method to address

8

model uncertainty. The next section provides a brief abstract of the BMA method and identifies
how the procedure resolves EKC model uncertainty.
3.1 Addressing Model Uncertainty in the Income / Environment Relationship
The issue of model uncertainty in general has long been recognized as a major problem in
economics. When inferences are based on one model alone, the ambiguity involved in model
selection dilutes information about effect sizes and predictions since “part of the evidence is
spent to specify the model” (Leamer, 1978, page 91). It is therefore not surprising that averaging
over all models can be proven to provide better average predictive performance than just picking
any single model (Madigan and Raftery, 1994).
The basic model averaging idea originated with Jeffreys (1961) and Leamer (1978),
whose insights were developed and operationalized by Draper (1995) and Raftery (1995). BMA
was first introduced to economics by Fernandez, Ley and Steel (2001), with an application to
economic growth. Here we restrict ourselves to sketching the basic BMA structure before we
discuss the results (for an extensive discussion of BMA see Hoeting, Madigan, Raftery and
Volinsky, 1999). Environmental applications of BMA include (among many others) Farnsworth
et al. (2006) and Fernandez, Ley and Steel (2002).
Consider n independent replications from a linear regression model. The dependent
variable (S02 pollution) in n countries grouped in vector γ is regressed on an intercept α and a
number of explanatory variables chosen from a set of k candidate regressors contained in a
design matrix Z of dimension n x k . Assume that r (ιn : Z ) = k + 1 , where r (⋅) indicates the
rank of a matrix and ιn is an n -dimensional vector of ones. Further define β as the full k dimensional vector of regression coefficients.
Now suppose that we have a n × k j submatrix of variables in Z denoted by Z j . Then

denote by M j the model with regressors grouped in Z j , such that
y = αι n + Z j β j + σε ,
where β j ∈ ℜ

kj

(0 ≤ k j ≤ k ) groups regression coefficients corresponding to the submatrix Z j ,

σ ∈ ℜ + is a scale parameter, and ε is a random error term that follows an n -dimensional

9

normal distribution with a zero mean and an identity covariance matrix. Exclusion of a regressor
in a particular model implies that the corresponding element of β is zero. Since we allow for
any subset of variables in Z to appear in each model, M j , there exist 2 k possible sampling
models.
Given this setup, BMA implies that the posterior probability of any given parameter of
interest, ∆, has a common interpretation across models. It is the weighted posterior distribution
of ∆ under each of the models, with weights given by the posterior model probabilities, or
P∆| y = ∑ P∆| y , M j P (M j | y ).
2k

(1)

j =1

That is, the marginal posterior probability of including a particular regressor is the weighted sum
of the posterior probabilities of all models that contain the regressor. The posterior model
probability for Model Mj is given by

P(M j | y) =

l y (M j ) p j
2

k

,

(2)

∑ l y (M h ) ph

h =1

where l y ( M j ) , is the marginal likelihood of model M j given by
l y ( M j ) = ∫ p( y | α , β j , σ , M j ) p (α , σ ) p( β j | α , σ , M j )dα dβ j dσ ,
Note that p( y | α , β j , σ , M j ) is the sampling model corresponding to equation (1), and p(α , σ )
and p ( β j | α , σ , M j ) are the priors of the intercept and the regressors, respectively.
Thus, BMA does not rely on any individual model to generate inferences, but provides a
posterior distribution for each estimate. BMA thus bases the inference on the weighted average
of a selection of models. The weights themselves are given by a measure of the quality of each
individual model relative to all other models. BMA therefore constitutes an intuitively attractive
solution to model uncertainty as it considers all possible models and generates an average that is
dominated by models which receive the greatest support from the data.
Despite its theoretical rigor and power of inference, BMA has not yet become part of the
standard data analysis tool kit. This has been due to several early difficulties in implementing

10

BMA. First, the number of terms in equation (1) can be enormous, rendering exhaustive
summation infeasible. This problem has recently been addressed by an efficient search algorithm
incorporated into the Raftery et al. (1997) “bic.reg” routine.6 The routine guarantees that the
best model is found, while alternative samplers such as MC3 (Madigan et al., 1995) or the totally
random coin flip sampler (Sala-i-Martin, Doppelhofer and Miller, 2003) do not provide such an
efficient search.
Much more problematic for BMA has been the Bayesian requirement to specify prior
distributions for all parameters in all competing models. An extensive discussion on the
significance of priors in BMA is provided by Fernandez, Ley and Steel (2001) and in Eicher,
Papageorgiou and Raftery (2006). In our application of BMA below, we utilize priors that are
among the most conservative and diffuse Bayesian priors. The unit information prior employed
below is so diffuse and uncontroversial that it can be derived from frequentist statistics.7
4.

Reduced-Form Approaches to the EKC

Before we can employ BMA, we must motivate the various candidate regressors that are
to be included alongside the GDP measures. A number of covariates have been introduced in the
past to explain sulphur dioxide concentrations. These regressors can be grouped into five
different categories: 1) site-specific controls, 2) political economy proxies, 3) production
structure, 4) trade measures, and 5) technology proxies. We discuss each one in detail below.
Stations from 44 countries around the world report sulfur dioxide concentrations in the
GEMS/AIRS data. A compelling argument can be made that any analysis of the incomepollution relationship must include regressors that control for site-specific factors. Examples of
regional variations that may explain sulphur dioxide concentrations in the vicinity of a measuring
station would be specific weather conditions (temperature and precipitation) or topographical
features. Such regional differences affect nature’s ability to cleanse sulphur dioxide from the
atmosphere. While variables such as Temperature, Precipitation Variation, and topographic
features are unlikely to be correlated with our economic variables, their inclusion is standard in
the literature and meant to improve the accuracy of the estimates. Our site-specific controls are
6

The software can be freely obtained from http://www.research.att.com/~volinsky/software/bicreg.
The unit information prior is a multivariate normal prior with mean at the maximum likelihood estimate and
variance equal to the expected information matrix for one observation (Kass and Wasserman, 1995). It can be
thought of as a prior distribution that contains the same amount of information as a single, typical observation.
7

11

obtained from ACT, who include average monthly temperatures for each reporting station to
capture seasonal influences on the demand for fuels (and hence SO2 concentrations), and to
account for the fact that higher temperatures allow SO2 to dissipate pollution more rapidly. We
also include the variation in precipitation at each site from ACT since seasonally-concentrated
rainfall reduces the region’s ability to dissipate SO2 over the year. In addition, we add a dummy
for nations who signed the 1985 Helsinki Protocol, which aimed to reduce sulphur emissions by
at least 30 per cent.8
Before we turn to economic covariates, we must also control for common-to-world but
nevertheless time-varying components. Such components are included to reflect secular changes
in global awareness of environmental problems, innovations and diffusion of abatement
technology, and the evolution of world prices. We follow the standard practice in the literature
and seek to capture such common components with a linear time trend.
A number of studies have extended the pure EKC specification to include additional
explanatory variables that may be tied to both pollution and economic development. Clearly
income alone does not create pressure to improve environmental outcomes; the democratic fabric
of a society that allows political participation and threatens consequences to polluting dictators is
also seen as an important determinant. Hence the past literature introduced variables to account
for the fact that more open and democratic societies may have different attitudes towards the
environment. The conjecture is that for a given level of income, more open societies experience
less pollution.
Many specific mechanisms for this to take place have been identified in the literature.
Torras and Boyce (1998) posit that richer individuals gain “power” to demand better overall
environmental quality. Likewise, Barrett and Graddy (2000) propose that wealthier citizens
demand an increase in the non-material aspects of their standard of living. The degree to which
policy responds to such desires is closely linked to the ability of individuals to assemble,
organize and voice their concerns. In the same vain, Panatayotou (1997) provides evidence that
strong property rights “flatten” the EKC by generating less pollution for any given income level.

8

Much of the previous research, starting with Grossman and Krueger (1993, 1995), also includes site-geography
variables such as proximity to oceans or deserts. Our fixed-effects regressions account for these implicitly.

12

Several different measures of political rights and civil liberties have been used in the
literature. Some authors have employed the Freedom House indices (e.g., Shafik and
Bandyopadhyay, 1992; Torras and Boyce, 1998; Barrett and Graddy, 2000) while others such as
Panayotou (1997) use “Respect/Enforcement of Contracts” from Knack and Keefer (1995). More
recently Harbaugh et al. (2002) use an index of democratization from the Jaggers and Gurr
(1995) Polity III dataset. Alternatively, Leitão (2006) introduces measures of corruption to
examine how diversion activities may affect an EKC. The institutions and growth literature has
since established the use of the “Constraint on Executive” variable from the updated Marshall
and Jaggers (2003) Polity IV database as perhaps the best measure to capture the above
mentioned effects. Acemoglu et al. (2001) have shown convincingly that the degree of constraint
on the executive is a fundamental determinant of all political rights. We thus choose this measure
as our political rights proxy.9
International trade has also been associated with the EKC relationship. Taylor and Brock
(2004) survey the literature, highlighting an early contention by Arrow et al. (1995) and Stern et
al. (1996) that an EKC might be partly or largely due to trade and its implied global distribution
of polluting industries. Following the Heckscher-Ohlin model, the authors hypothesized that free
trade allows developing countries to specialize in goods that are intensive in their relatively
abundant factors: labor and natural resources. Developed countries, in turn, are likely to
specialize in human capital and capital intensive goods. Following ACT, we use trade volume
(exports plus imports) as a percent of GDP as our measure of openness to trade.
In contrast, Shafik and Bandyopadhyay (1992) point out that trade might exert two
contrasting influences on developing countries. First, there exists the above effect where
developing countries have an environmental comparative advantage due to low environmental
protection costs, which leads to the intense manufacture and export of pollution-intensive goods.
On the other hand, increased openness may lead to increased competition, which could cause
more investment in efficient and cleaner technologies that meet the environmental standards of
developed nations. To control for potentially opposing forces, we follow Harbaugh et al. (2002)
and include not only trade, but also a measure of investment in our analysis. To the extent that a
portion of investment leads to cleaner manufacturing processes, including investment should
9

Note that the literature has clearly established the absence of a direct democracy/income relationship (Acemoglu et
al., 2005). Hence we do not interpret our political economy measure as a proxy for income.

13

help control for the role of technological change in explaining the EKC. Alternatively, tradeinduced dynamic comparative advantage has also been closely tied to the composition of output
at different stages of development. This composition effect was proxied by Panayotou et al.
(2000) with a capital intensity variable. Here we use an improved version of the capital intensity
proxy from ACT who introduced a human capital adjusted capital-labor ratio.
Since a key hypothesis central to the EKC is that political pressure builds as richer agents
demand greater environmental quality, education is also seen as a major factor in the
pollution/development relationship. Torras and Boyce (1998) include adult literacy rates in their
search for the EKC, noting that literacy allows greater informational access and a more even
distribution of power within society. Our measure of education is years of education from Barro
and Lee (2000). Years of education should be a better proxy for access to information since basic
literacy only implies knowledge of rudimentary reading and writing skills. We use average years
of education over the prior three years to account for the fact that it takes some time to translate
educational achievement into environmental activism.
Another important covariate often included in the literature is population density
(Grossman and Krueger, 1995; Panayotou, 1997; Barrett and Grady, 2000; ACT; Harbaugh et
al., 2002). Panayotou argues that population density may have an ambiguous effect since more
dense areas can expect greater use of coal and non-commercial fuels, but densely populated
countries may also be more concerned about lowering pollution concentrations. We follow
Harbaugh et al. (2002) and include national population density in order to have a relatively
accurate time-series measure of population density for both developed and developing countries.
4.1

Reduced-Form BMA EKC Results

In Tables 1-3 we report the results from our BMA analysis which includes all variables
that have been motivated by reduced-forms as described in the previous section. The results in
the tables are robust to specifications of GDP in logs, different GDP lag structures (up to 10-year
averaged lags) and alternative “U-curve” specifications such as Anand and Kanbur’s (1993)
specifications based on inverse GDP. The tables report results at the station, city and country
level (Tables 1, 2 and 3 respectively). As is common in the literature, we include GDP and
lagged GDP with linear and non-linear terms (see Grossman and Krueger, 1995, for example). In
contrast to simple fixed- and random-effects regressions where collinearity between GDP and

14

lagged GDP variables might compromise the explanatory power of either variable, BMA
averages across relevant models and thus potentially mitigates the effects of collinearity.
The first column of each table reports the posterior inclusion probability, P, which
indicates the probability that the coefficient estimate is different from zero.10 P ≠ 0 is thus a
measure of confidence of including a candidate regressor with non-zero coefficient in the true
regression model. The posterior inclusion probability has the additional advantage that it is a
scale-free probability measure of the relative importance of the variables, which can therefore be
transparently applied for policy decisions and inference, in addition to the posterior mean and
standard deviation.

Jeffries (1961) and Raftery (1995) add the additional interpretational

refinement that P ≠ 0 > 50 percent suggests that the data provides weak evidence that the
regressor is included in the true model; P ≠ 0 > 75 percent implies positive evidence; P ≠ 0 > 95
percent provides strong evidence; and P ≠ 0 > 99 percent gives very strong evidence. Inclusion
probabilities close to 100 percent signal that the particular regressor is included in almost all
good models, and that it contributes prominently to explaining the dependent variable even in the
presence of significant model uncertainty.
Overall, we find only limited support for income as a key driver of SO2 concentrations.
Only the highly unbalanced datasets at the station and city level (Tables 1 and 2) report positive
evidence of an EKC relationship between income and SO2 concentrations (the GDP data is in
$10,000). Table 1 shows that lagged GDP has a much higher inclusion probability than current
GDP, implying that contemporaneous economic activity is much less important in determining
SO2 concentrations than the indirect effects of rising income over time that may proxy for
changes in technology. Nevertheless, fundamental variables, not income, are the most relevant
for explaining pollution levels. Precipitation Variation and Executive Constraints both have 100
percent inclusion probabilities, while the income polynomials range around 80 percent. We find
that less variation in precipitation, increased temperatures, and greater constraints on the
country’s chief executive reduce sulphur dioxide concentrations. The only economic variable
that registers as significant in the reduced-form station level results is Trade Intensity. Here the
evidence is decisive that trade reduces pollution.
10

In contrast to frequentist statistics, where one null and one alternative model is implied, BMA considers all
possible models, hence simple t-values are not appropriate. Indeed, Raftery (1995) notes that the theory of t-values
was developed for the comparison of two nested models and in a typical structural equation model application, such
as the EKC, there may be many substantively meaningful models (many of them non-nested).

15

The best single regression model selected by BMA at the station level has an R2 of 0.249,
containing all eight variables that exhibit at least weak evidence in terms of inclusion
probabilities. The city-level results in Table 2 are just about identical to those at the station level
except that the previously weakly significant temperature variable is no longer relevant.
Although the best model at the city-level is based on fewer regressors and less observations, its
R2 increases to 0.319. We surmise that the improvement in explanatory power results from the
fact that the aggregated dataset is less prone to oversampling.
The major change in the results occurs when we aggregate the data to the country level.
Table 3 no longer provides evidence that income has an influence on pollution. None of the GDP
variables matter, perhaps because oversampling has eliminated the location bias and the dataset
is balanced in terms of its time dimension. Nevertheless, all other variables that have been shown
to be robustly related to pollution remain strongly significant and their posterior means are
surprisingly stable. Political freedom, Trade, and local weather variations explain a large part of
the pollution variability. Interestingly, at the country level, Education and technology (proxied
by the Year variable) now have high inclusion probabilities, providing strong evidence that these
candidate regressors belong to the true model. As we aggregate from the station to the city and
finally to the country level, the R2 of the best model systematically increases (although the
number of observations drops from 623 to 109). While the R2 is only 0.249 for the best model
with station-level data, it rises to 0.475 at the country level.
In summary, after sorting through a wide range of models that have been proposed as
reduced-form approaches to the EKC, including all permutations on these models, BMA returns
strong evidence that trade, political economy and site-specific factors are the main determinants
of sulphur dioxide pollution. In all of the BMA analyses these variables are included with the
expected sign. There is some evidence that SO2 concentrations are influenced by past income at
the station and city levels, but this influence vanishes once we correct for oversampling. So far
we have simply included variables without any specific theoretical support as to the overall
model structure. In the next section we investigate if theory-specified functional forms and
interactions may indeed lead to a specification that provides support for an EKC relationship.
5. Theory-Motivated EKC Regressors

16

Second-generation EKC models include not only variables motivated by heuristic,
reduced-forms, but also fully specified models that yield precise, testable EKC implications and
relationships. The essential features of the models include the determinants of scale,
composition, and technique effects outlined by Panayotou (1997) and discussed in extensive
detail by Taylor and Brock (2004). Prominent theoretical precursors that have led to the state of
the art, fully specified, open-economy EKC model in ACT are Stokey (1998) (endogenous
abatement), Bovenberg and Smulders (1995) and Aghion and Howitt (1998) (endogenous
growth/technique), and Jones and Manuelli (2001) (endogenous policy). We direct the interested
reader to the excellent Taylor and Brock survey and address only cornerstones of the theoretical
EKC models that are relevant to empirical investigation.
All models that examine the development/pollution relationship make implicit
assumptions regarding the strength of three different (and potentially offsetting) effects. First,
development causes a positive scale effect since increased output per unit of capital leads to
increased pollution. To account for the scale effect we follow ACT and employ a measure of
city-level economic intensity (national GDP per capita times city population density). It is
generally held that in rapidly growing middle-income countries pollution due to the scale effect
might be the dominant EKC force (Perman and Stern 2003).
Second, a technique effect diminishes the scale effect as technological progress permits a
lowering of emissions per unit of output. Lagged per capita income is used to proxy for the
technique effect since countries with higher incomes in the past should be able to afford better
technology today (see ACT). Diffusion of technology itself motivates the idea that time-related
effects reduce environmental impacts in countries at all levels of development (Aghion and
Howitt, 1998, Perman and Stern, 2003). These effects are usually proxied with a year dummy.
To isolate either the scale or technique effect, we must control for changes in the
composition of output. A change in output composition can mitigate the scale effect further if the
share of less pollution-intensive industries rises as income increases. This occurs when
development and human capital accumulation generate shifts toward cleaner industries (services
or information technology) and an ensuing change in the composition of output that then reduces
environmental degradation (Panayotou, 1993). A specific model was first presented by Copeland
and Taylor (2003), who showed that the reliance on capital accumulation in early stages of

17

development, as opposed to human capital accumulation in later stages, can also generate an
EKC. We capture the composition effect by controlling for differences in the capital-labor ratio
that is adjusted for human capital, following ACT. In the absence of such controls, the pollutionincome relationship is a mixture of scale, composition, and technique effects, which is hard to
interpret.
In addition to a simple income/output-induced composition effect, ACT also take into
account a trade-induced composition effect. As discussed in the reduced-form literature, the
effect of trade on pollution can be ambiguous. In ACT the trade-induced composition effect
depends on the country’s comparative advantage, which in turn is determined by income per
capita and capital abundance. In moving from theory to practice, ACT suggest interacting the
trade measure with determinants of comparative advantage (the capital-labor ratio and income
per capita). Since comparative advantage is a relative concept, these are measured relative to the
corresponding world averages. Since theory cannot identify a turning point (at what level of
endowment trade causes a switch from exporting to importing pollution-intensive products), we
adopt the flexible approach of ACT by estimating interactions with different functional forms.
To allow BMA to replicate the ACT results, we include a site-specific dummy for
communist regimes which we interact with income per capita. This allows for a unique
pollution-income dynamic in communist nations where political participation is extremely low.
We can then test whether communist regimes are inherently disinterested in a public desire for a
cleaner environment. Essentially we have already introduced a variable that proxies for the
political economy effects with Executive Constraints, but BMA is exactly the appropriate
statistical framework to elicit which one (if any) of these proxies influences pollution.
It is important to note that theory does not necessarily imply such an elaborate structure.
As mentioned in the introduction, Taylor and Brock (2004) meticulously outline that the EKC is
compatible with many different underlying mechanisms and theories. The simplest of all is
perhaps the environment augmented “Green Solow model” where pollution policy remains
unchanged throughout the development process and where transitional dynamics alone suffice to
generate an EKC. The Green Solow model exhibits no composition effects, no changes in
pollution abatement, no evolution of the political process and no international trade. Hence the
Green Solow model is compatible with no change in trade or pollution policy as the country

18

experiences positive growth. BMA is the natural statistical tool to examine the validity of the
competing theories, and to address the inherent model uncertainty.
5.1 Theory-Based BMA EKC Results

The results in Table 4 contain theory-based candidate regressors (e.g., scale, composition,
and technique effects) as well as proxies motivated by empirical implementations of reducedform hypotheses. Given that ACT’s approach represents the most extensive, theory-based
empirical implementation of the EKC hypothesis, we choose their results as a benchmark.11 It is
comforting to see that the BMA results share a number of similarities with ACT. On the other
hand, BMA also produces a number of surprises.
Different levels of aggregation (and hence different degrees of oversampling) generate
remarkably stable outcomes in terms of posterior inclusion probabilities and posterior means.
Table 4 shows that BMA identifies between four (city-level) and seven (country-level) candidate
regressors with weak to decisive evidence of a non-zero impact on pollution. Common across all
levels of aggregation is that there exists no evidence of an EKC. Instead, the prominence of sitespecific and political economy variables carries over from our structural results at all levels of
aggregation. There is strong and decisive evidence that non-economic factors, such as
Temperature, Precipitation, and Executive Constraints, affect pollution in the same fashion as in
the reduced-form BMA Tables 1-3.
Of all variables that receive positive evidence in Table 4, only Executive Constraints does
not appear in the theory-specified ACT model. Recall that ACT included the “Communist”
variable to capture political economy effects, which was highly significant in their specification
(although not in BMA).12 Executive Constraints thus remains highly significant not only in the
reduced-form, but also in the structural analysis. This provides strong support for the Jones and
Manuelli (2001) approach to pollution that emphasizes the political process, not income, as the
driving force in the development/pollution relationship.
The major difference between the reduced-form specifications and the theory-based
results is that Trade Intensity loses its significance entirely. While it does register as significant
in the ACT model, BMA provides no evidence that Trade carries any explanatory power at the
11
12

ACT do not report results for city or country level data.
The correlation between Communist/Income interaction used by ACT and Executive Constraints is -0.48.

19

station, city or country level. Nevertheless, the BMA results do suggest that Trade plays an
important indirect role in determining pollution. The correct specification of the trade effect as
outlined by the ACT theory is crucial. Here BMA reveals that the importance of Trade lies in its
power to moderate the composition effect.
ACT find that Trade moderates the pure EKC effect as the trade/income interactions in
their regression are highly significant. In the BMA approach, in contrast, this is income effect is
confirmed only at the station level (ACT’s level of aggregation). In the less unbalanced city- and
country-level datasets, BMA indicates that Trade’s sole role is to moderate the composition
effect. The interaction between Trade and Capital Intensity shows that the composition effect has
a different impact on countries depending on their level of development. The greater the level of
development – as proxied by the human capital augmented capital-labor ratio – the lower the
implied concentrations for open economies. The capital intensity variable has been included in
the past to control for development-contingent shifts towards cleaner technologies; while it
exhibited the same sign in ACT, it was statistically insignificant. The variable also provides
support for pollution havens, since the negative coefficient implies that countries with low
capital intensity and high trade orientations have higher pollution levels.
The second trade-related variable that receives strong support in BMA at all levels of
aggregation is the interaction between Trade, GDP, and Capital Intensity. Interestingly, this
variable is the one regressor that is estimated with just about the same coefficients and high level
of significance in ACT as in BMA. The positive estimate throughout thus provides strong
evidence that more human/physical-capital-intensive countries have higher sulphur dioxide
concentrations, even after we control for trade and income effects. This is because the three-way
interaction between Trade, GDP, and the Human Capital adjusted capital-labor ratio has a
positive posterior mean. The relatively large role of the composition effect and the trade-based
interactions suggests that countries do not follow a deterministic income-pollution path. Recall
that Figure 3 highlights the variety of country-specific pollution paths as incomes rise.
In contrast to ACT, BMA does not find evidence for a pure composition effect as capital
intensity alone cannot be shown to affect pollution. In addition, despite our efforts to control for
possible contamination of the scale effect, BMA provides no evidence that scale effects matter at
the station level (the scale effect was only mildly significant in ACT’s work). Oversampling does

20

influence the strength of the technique effect (proxied by Year), as BMA provides strong
evidence that a technique effect reduces pollution at the country level. A similar pattern was
observed in our reduced-form analysis, where the same variable gained explanatory power only
at higher levels of aggregation. These findings are in line with Stern and Common (2001) and
Stern (2002) who find evidence for the important role of negative time effects in explaining
declining SO2 concentrations.
It is important to note that the best model chosen by BMA contains about a quarter of the
23 candidate regressors that have been motivated by the literature. At the station level, six
highly significant regressors account for about twice the variation in the dependent variable (R2 =
0.242) as the 18 regressors (13 significant) suggested by the ACT specification (R2 = 0.15). This
could imply that a number of regressors identified by ACT may be significant only because the
empirical strategy did not account for model uncertainty. The estimates at different levels of
aggregation are surprisingly stable, however, and their R2 increases steadily from station, city, to
country levels, from 0.24 to 0.34 to 0.51, respectively. Also, the relevant regressors at the city
and station level are just about identical, although the country-level results do feature two
additional regressors to explain pollution (Year and Education). The coefficient on Education is
counterintuitive just as in the reduced-form BMA results. It is supposed to proxy for the
hypothesis that better-educated citizens demand better environmental quality.

However,

measures of education have been shown to be fragile in both growth regressions and in
development accounting (see Krueger and Lindahl, 2001). Perhaps the same issues contaminate
the effect of the regressors here.
VI. Conclusion

This paper reexamines the evidence for an environmental Kuznets curve using the most
recent EPA data on SO2 concentrations. The literature on the income-pollution relationship is
vast and characterized by unusual model uncertainty as both the number of proposed theories and
the range of possible candidate regressors is massive when it comes to empirical validation. We
apply a theoretically founded method to address model uncertainty. Bayesian Model Averaging
examines all models, weighs them by their relative quality, and then generates a probability that
a candidate regressor is related to the dependent variable.

21

Our results are presented at three levels of aggregation. The station-level results are
subject to severe oversampling as pollution from thousands of observations from local stations
are linked to one and the same measure of income in a country. Hence we also aggregate the data
to the city and country level. The results are remarkably robust. Political economy and sitespecific variables explain a large share of the observed pollution. International trade is also
shown again and again to be robustly related to pollution. In our reduced-form analysis, trade is
found to lower pollution. When the model is specified using full-fledged theory, we show that
trade has no direct effect, but that it moderates the composition effect. As countries become
richer and increase their physical and human capital, trade leads to cleaner environments. It
unfortunately also implies that poor, labor-intensive, open economies experience increasing
pollution levels.
Overall, we find only weak evidence for an EKC, which disappears when we address
oversampling of the data or move to a theory-based analysis. There may be several reasons the
EKC fails to hold up in our work. The foremost, perhaps, is that many countries in the time
period covered by the GEMS/AIRS data may already be on the flat or the downward sloping
portion of the EKC during the sample period. Smulders, Bretschger and Egli (2005) label these
portions of the EKC the “alarm phase” and the “cleaning-up phase” that indicate government
response to public concerns. Given that the rate of emissions reduction may also be based on
governments reacting to their citizens’ demands, it is not surprising that we find that policy
variables such as Executive Constraints play a crucial role in determining pollution levels.

22

References

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2001), ‘The colonial origins of comparative
development: an empirical investigation’, American Economic Review 91(5): 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, J.A. Robinson, and P. Yared (2005), ‘From education to democracy?’
American Economic Review 95(2): 44-49.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1998), ‘Capital accumulation and innovation as complementary
factors in long-run growth’, Journal of Economic Growth 3: 111-130.
Anand, S. and S.M.R. Kanbur (1993), ‘Inequality and development: a critique’, Development
Economics 41: 19-43.
Antweiler, W., B.R. Copeland, and M.S. Taylor (2001), ‘Is free trade good for the environment?’
American Economic Review 91: 877-908.
Arrow, K., B. Bolin, R. Costanza, P. Dasgupta, C. Folke, C.S. Holling, B-O Jansson, S. Levin,
K-G Mäler. C. Perrings, and D. Pimentel (1995), ‘Economic growth, carrying capacity, and
the environment’, Science 268: 520-521.
Barrett, S. and K. Graddy (2000), ‘Freedom, growth, and the environment’, Environment and
Development Economics 5: 433-456.
Barro, R. J. (1990), ‘Government spending in a simple model of endogenous growth’, Journal of
Political Economy 98: S103-S125.
Barro, R. J. and J-W Lee (2000), ‘International data on educational attainment: updates and
implications’, CID Working Paper No. 42.
Birdsall, N. and D. Wheeler (1993), ‘Trade policy and industrial pollution in Latin America:
where are the pollution havens?’ Journal of Environment and Development 2(1): 137–149.
Bovenberg, A.L. and S. Smulders (1995), ‘Environmental quality and pollution-saving
technological change in a two-sector endogenous growth model’, Journal of Public
Economics 57: 369-391.
Cole, M.A. (1999) ‘Limits to growth, sustainable development and environmental Kuznets
curves: an examination of the environmental impact of economic development’, Sustainable
Development 7(2): 87-97.
Copeland, B.R. and M.S. Taylor (2003), ‘Trade and the Environment: Theory and Evidence’,
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2003.
Copeland, B.R. and M.S. Taylor (2004), ‘Trade, growth, and the environment’, Journal of
Economic Literature 42(1): 7-71.
Cropper, M. and C. Griffiths (1994), ‘The interaction of population growth and environmental
quality’, American Economic Review 84: 250-254.
De Bruyn, S.M., J.C.J.M. van den Bergh, and J.B. Opschoor (1998), ‘Economic growth and
emissions: reconsidering the empirical basis of environmental Kuznets curves’, Ecological
Economics 25: 161-175.

23

Deacon, R.T. and C.S. Norman (2006), ‘Does the environmental Kuznets curve describe how
individual countries behave?’ Land Economics 82: 291-315.
Doppelhofer, G. (2005), ‘Model Averaging’, in L. Blume and S. Durlauf. (eds.), The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition, London: Palgrave Macmillan, forthcoming.
Draper, D. (1995), ‘Assessment and propagation of model uncertainty (with discussion)’,
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 57(1): 45-97.
Eicher, T.S., C. Papageorgiou, and A.E. Raftery (2006), ‘Bayesian model averaging in
economics’, Working Paper.
Farnsworth, M.L., J. A. Hoeting, N. T. Hobbs, and M. W. Miller (2006), ‘Linking chronic
wasting disease to mule deer movement scales: a hierarchical Bayesian approach’, Ecological
Applications 16(3): 1026-1036.
Fernández, C., E. Ley, and M.F.J. Steel (2001), ‘Model uncertainty in cross-country growth
regressions’, Journal of Applied Econometrics 16(5): 563-576.
Fernández, C., E. Ley, and M.F.J. Steel (2002), ‘Bayesian modeling of catch in a north-west
Atlantic fishery’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C 51: 257-280.
Goklany, I. (2002), ‘Comparing twentieth century trends in US and global agricultural water and
land use’, Water International 27(3): 321-329.
Grossman, G.M. and A.B. Krueger (1991), ‘Environmental impacts of a North American free
trade agreement’, NBER Working Paper 3914.
Grossman, G.M. and A.B. Krueger (1993), ‘Environmental impacts of a North American free
trade agreement,’ in P. M. Garber, (ed.), The U.S.-Mexico Free Trade Agreement, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, pp. 13-56.
Grossman, G. M. and A.B. Krueger (1995), ‘Economic growth and the environment’, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 110(2): 353-377.
Harbaugh, W. T., A. Levinson, and D.M. Wilson (2002), ‘Reexamining the empirical evidence
for an environmental Kuznets curve’, Review of Economics and Statistics 83: 541-551.
Heston, A., R. Summers, and B. Aten (2002), Penn World Table Version 6.1, Center for
International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP), [Computer File], URL:
http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/php_site/pwt_index.php.
Hoeting, J. A., D. Madigan, A. E. Raftery, and C.T. Volinsky (1999), ‘Bayesian model
averaging: a tutorial’, Statistical Science 14: 382-417.
Hsiao, C. (1986), Analysis of Panel Data, Econometric Society Monographs No. 11, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Jaggers, K. and T. R. Gurr (1995), ‘Polity III: regime change and political authority, 1800-1994’,
[Computer File], URL: http://privatewww.essex.ac.uk/~ksg/Polity.html.
Jeffreys, H. (1961), Theory of Probability (3rd Edition), Oxford: The Clarendon Press.
Jones, L.E. and R.E. Manuelli (2001), ‘Endogenous policy choice: the case of pollution and
growth’, Review of Economic Dynamics 4(2): 369-405.

24

Kass, R.E. and L. Wasserman (1995), ‘A reference Bayesian test for nested hypotheses and its
relationship to the Schwartz criterion’, Journal of the American Statistical Association 90:
928-934.
Krueger, A. B. and M. Lindahl (2001), ‘Education for growth: why and for whom?’ Journal of
Economic Literature 39(4): 1101-1136.
Kuznets, S. (1955), ‘Economic growth and income inequality’, American Economic Review
45(1): 1-28.
Leamer, E. (1978), Specification Searches, New York: Wiley.
Leitão, A. (2006), ‘Corruption and the environmental Kuznets curve: empirical evidence for
sulfur’, Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Working Paper.
Madigan, D. and A. E. Raftery (1994), ‘Model selection and accounting for model uncertainty in
graphical models using Occam’s Window’, Journal of the American Statistical Association
89: 1535-1546.
Madigan, D., J. York, and D. Allard (1995), ‘Bayesian graphical models for discrete data’,
International Statistical Review 63(2): 199-214.
Marshall, M. G. and K. Jaggers (2003), Polity IV Project: Political Regime Characteristics and
Transitions, 1800-2003, [Computer File], URL: http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity/.
Mundlak, Y. (1978), ‘On the pooling of time series and cross section data’, Econometrica 46(1):
69-85.
Panayotou, T. (1995), ‘Environmental degradation at different stages of economic development’,
in I. Ahmed and J.A. Doeleman (eds.), Beyond Rio: The Environmental Crisis and
Sustainable Livelihoods in the Third World, London: Macmillan, pp. 13-36.
Panayotou, T. (1997), ‘Demystifying the environmental Kuznets curve: turning a black box into
a policy tool’, Environment and Development Economics 2: 465-484.
Panayotou, T., A. Peterson, and J. Sachs (2000), ‘Is the environmental Kuznets curve driven by
structural change? What extended time series may imply for developing countries’, CAER II
Discussion Paper 80.
Perman, R. and D. I. Stern (2003), ‘Evidence from panel unit root and cointegration tests that the
environmental Kuznets curve does not exist’, Australian Journal of Agricultural and
Resource Economics 47: 325-347.
Raftery, A.E. (1995), ‘Bayesian model selection in social research (with discussion)’,
Sociological Methodology 25: 111-196.
Raftery, A.E., D. Madigan, and J.A. Hoeting (1997), ‘Bayesian model averaging for linear
regression models’, Journal of the American Statistical Association 92: 179-191.
Roberts, J. and P. Grimes (1997), ‘Carbon intensity and economic development 1962-91: a brief
exploration of the environmental Kuznets curve’, World Development 25: 191-198.
Rock, M.T. (1998), ‘Freshwater use, freshwater scarcity, and socioeconomic development’,
Journal of Environment and Development 7: 278-301.

25

Sala-i-Martin, X., G. Doppelhoffer, and R. Miller (2004), ‘Determinants of long-term growth: a
Bayesian averages of classical estimates (BACE) approach’, American Economic Review
94(4): 813-835.
Selden, T.M. and D. Song (1994), ‘Environmental quality and development: Is there a Kuznets
curve for air pollution?’ Journal of Environmental Economics and Environmental
Management 27: 147-162.
Shafik, N. (1994), ‘Economic development and environmental quality: an econometric analysis’,
Oxford Economic Papers 46: 757-773.
Shafik, N. and S. Bandyopadhyay (1992), ‘Economic growth and environmental quality’, World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper WPS 904.
Smith, S.J., R. Andres, E. Conception, and J. Lurz (2004), ‘Historical sulfur dioxide emissions
1850-2000: methods and results’, PNNL Research Report, Joint Climate Change Research
Institute, College Park.
Smulders, S., L. Bretschger, and H. Egli (2005), ‘Economic growth and the diffusion of clean
technologies: explaining environmental Kuznets curves’, Economics Working Paper Series,
Working Paper 05/42, WIF – Institute of Economic Research.
Stern, D.I. (2002), ‘Explaining changes in global sulfur emissions: an econometric
decomposition approach, Ecological Economics 42: 201-220.
Stern, D.I. (2004), ‘The rise and fall of the environmental Kuznets curve’, World Development
32(8): 1419-1439.
Stern, D.I. and M.S. Common (2001), ‘Is there an environmental Kuznets curve for sulfur?’
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 41(2): 162-178.
Stern, D.I., M.S. Common, and E.B. Barbier (1996), ‘Economic growth and environmental
degradation: the environmental Kuznets curve and sustainable development’, World
Development 24(7): 1151-1160.
Stokey, N. L. (1998), ‘Are there limits to growth?’ International Economic Review 39: 1-31.
Taylor, M.S. and W. Brock (2004), ‘Economic growth and the environment: a review of theory
and empirics’, Department of Economics Discussion Paper 2004-14, University of Calgary.
Torras, M. and J. Boyce (1998), ‘Income, inequality, and pollution: a reassessment of the
environmental Kuznets curve’, Ecological Economics 25: 147-160.

26

APPENDIX
Table A-1: Summary Statistics
Variable
Log of median SO2
GDP
GDPt-3
City-GDP/km2
GNPt-3
Executive Constraints
Investment
Trade
Capital intensity (H*K/L)
National Population Density
Education t-3
Communist * GNP
Helsinki
Temperature
Precipitation Variation

# of Observations
653
623
623
653
653
653
653
653
653
653
653
653
653
653
653

Mean
-4.883
1.328
1.279
6.666
1.236
5.689
22.074
0.404
5.406
0.236
7.758
0.038
0.031
15.204
0.012

S.D.
1.052
0.848
0.819
8.061
0.803
2.003
5.613
0.264
2.613
0.265
3.041
0.125
0.153
6.011
0.006

Min.
-6.908
0.108
0.104
0.103
0.112
1.000
4.300
0.129
1.221
0.005
1.222
0.000
0.000
3.342
0.002

Max.
-2.181
2.673
2.626
57.565
2.635
7.000
41.200
1.484
16.974
1.187
11.806
0.716
1.000
28.751
0.043

Table A-2: Correlations

Temperature

Helsinki

Communist * GNP

Education t-3

National Population Density

Capital intensity (H*K/L)

Trade

Investment

Executive Constraints

GNPt-3

City-GDP/km2

GDP

Log of median SO2

Log of median SO2

1.00

GDP (in 1996 $10000)

-0.21

1.00

City-GDP/km

0.22

0.46

1.00

GNPt-3

-0.18

0.97

0.43

1.00

Executive Constraints

-0.28

0.67

0.27

0.65

1.00

Investment

0.14

0.28

0.44

0.26

0.18

1.00

Trade

-0.03

-0.06

-0.20

-0.09

0.09

0.15

1.00

Capital Intensity, H*K/L

0.04

0.55

0.28

0.53

0.38

0.45

0.23

1.00

National Population Density

0.30

-0.24

0.28

-0.28

0.00

0.26

0.25

-0.03

1.00

Education t-3

-0.27

0.92

0.34

0.91

0.62

0.26

-0.03

0.36

-0.25

1.00

Communist * GNP

0.16

-0.45

-0.20

-0.45

-0.48

0.03

-0.21

-0.46

0.08

-0.29

1.00

Helsinki

-0.11

0.18

0.04

0.17

0.13

0.15

0.16

0.21

-0.09

0.18

-0.07

1.00

Temperature

-0.16

-0.47

-0.17

-0.49

-0.30

-0.31

-0.23

-0.43

0.13

-0.49

-0.04

-0.25

1.00

Precipitation Variation

-0.02

-0.57

-0.31

-0.57

-0.36

-0.42

-0.10

-0.52

0.18

-0.53

0.17

-0.21

0.44

2

27

Figure 1
Distribution of SO2/Observations in GEMS/AIRS Data
1974-1993
Country
United States
China
Canada
Japan
Brazil
India
New Zealand
Spain
Iran
UK
Belgium
Australia
Colombia
Ireland
Netherlands
Egypt
Germany
Israel
Portugal
Philippines
Argentina
Finland
Sweden
Chile
France
Denmark
Greece
Italy
Thailand
Venezuela
Malaysia
Indonesia
Korea, South
Peru
Pakistan
Total

Obs.
620
212
187
135
71
69
68
54
53
52
47
43
39
39
37
36
36
33
32
31
27
25
25
22
22
21
20
20
20
20
15
13
12
10
2
2,168

%
28.6
9.8
8.6
6.2
3.3
3.2
3.1
2.5
2.4
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.5
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.7
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.1
100%

Israel Portugal
1%
2%

Philippines
1%

Obs 21-30
10%

China
10%

Germany
2%
Egypt
2%

United States
29%

Netherlands
2%
Ireland
2%
Colombia
2%
Canada
9%

Australia
2%
Belgium
2%
Obs < 20
2%
United Kingdom
2%

Japan
6%
Iran
2%

Spain New Zealand
2%
3%

India
3%

Brazil
3%

Source: US-EPA maintained GEMS/AIRS dataset http://www.epa.gov/airs/aexec.html

28

Figure 2
Relationship between Median SO2 Concentrations and Income (By Measuring Station)
1974-1993

-2

Log SO2 concentration

-3

-4

-5

-6

-7
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Real GDP per capita in $1,000's
Source: US-EPA maintained GEMS/AIRS dataset http://www.epa.gov/airs/aexec.html
Note: Fitted values are fixed-effects regression Log SO2 = α + βGDP + δGDP 2 + γGDP 3 + ε

29

Argentina

-2

Chile

-2

-2

-2

-2

-2

-3

-3

-3

-3

-3

-3

-4

-4

-4

-4

-4

-4

-5

-5

-5

-5

-5

-5

-6

-6

-6

-6

-6

-6

-7

-7

-7

-7

-7

0

5

-2

10

15

20

25

30

China

-3

Log median SO2 concentration

Figure 3
Relationship between Median SO2 Concentrations and Income (by Country)
1974-1993 Brazil
Australia
Belgium
Canada

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Colombia

-2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Denmark

-2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Egypt

-2

-7
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Finland

-2

0

-3

-3

-3

-3

-3

-4

-4

-4

-4

-4

-4

-5

-5

-5

-5

-5

-5

-6

-6

-6

-6

-6

-6

-7

-7

-7

-7

-7

0

5

10

-2

15

20

25

30

Germany

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Greece

-2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

India

-2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Indonesia

-2

5

10

15

20

25

30

Iran

-2

-3

-3

-3

-4

-4

-4

-4

-4

-4

-5

-5

-5

-5

-5

-5

-6

-6

-6

-6

-6

-6

-7

-7

-7

-7

-7

15

20

25

30

Israel

-2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Italy

-2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Japan

-2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Korea, South

-2

5

10

15

20

25

30

Malaysia

-2

0

-3

-3

-3

-3

-3

-4

-4

-4

-4

-4

-5

-5

-5

-5

-5

-5

-6

-6

-6

-6

-6

-6

-7

-7

-7

-7

-7

-2

10

15

20

25

30

New Zealand

-3

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Pakistan

-2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Peru

-2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Philippines

-2

5

10

15

20

25

30

Portugal

-2
-3

-3

-4

-4

-4

-4

-4

-4

-5

-5

-5

-5

-5

-5

-6

-6

-6

-6

-6

-6

-7

-7

-7

-7

-7

-2

15

20

25

30

Sweden

-3

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Thailand

-2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

United Kingdom

-2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

United States

-2
-3

-3

-4

-4

-4

-4

-4

-5

-5

-5

-5

-5

-6

-6

-6

-6

-6

-7

-7

-7

-7

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

Venezuela

-2

-3

-7
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Real GDP per capita in $1,000's
Source: US-EPA maintained GEMS/AIRS dataset http://www.epa.gov/airs/aexec.html.
Note: Annual SO2 concentration averages, aggregated from station to country levels.

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

20

25

30

Spain

-7
0

-3

15

Netherlands

0

-3

10

10

-2

-3

5

30

-7
0

-3

0

25

Ireland

-2

-4

5

20

-7
0

-3

0

5

-2

-3

10

15

France

0

-3

5

10

-7
0

-3

0

5

-2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

0

5

10

15

Figure 4
Global Relationship between Median SO2 Concentrations and Income
1974 – 1993
-2

Log SO2 concentration

-3

-4

-5

-6

-7
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Real GDP per capita in $1,000's
Source: US-EPA maintained GEMS/AIRS dataset http://www.epa.gov/airs/aexec.html
Note: Five-year SO2 concentration averages, aggregated from the station to the country level.

31

Table 1
Reduced-Form BMA Results (By Station)
Dependent Variable: Log median SO2 concentrations, 5-year averages

Intercept

P≠0
100.0

Precipitation Variation

100.0

Trade Intensity

100.0

Executive Constraints

100.0

(GDPt-3)2

82.1

GDPt-3

81.9

(GDPt-3)3

81.9

Temperature

77.1

Investment

46.3

(GDP)2

20.8

(GDP)3

20.8

GDP

19.4

Capital Intensity, H*K/L

10.7

(Capital Intensity, H*K/L)2

9.4

Educationt-3

6.0

Helsinki

4.2

Year

3.4

National Population Density

2.6

Observations
R2

Posterior Mean
(S.D.)
-2.6584
(3.1423)
45.2092
(8.6828)
-2.9292
(0.4049)
-0.1932
(0.0306)
-2.9432
(1.5643)
4.6092
(2.4945)
0.5505
(0.2948)
-0.1365
(0.0914)
-0.0090
(0.0111)
-0.5119
(1.1911)
0.0886
(0.2136)
0.8345
(1.9899)
0.0096
(0.0338)
0.0004
(0.0017)
0.0039
(0.0215)
-0.0058
(0.0456)
-0.0001
(0.0014)
0.0010
(0.0516)

Best Model Mean
(S.D.)
-2.4109*
(1.3776)
45.1435***
(10.6779)
-2.9285***
(0.4922)
-0.1972***
(0.0380)
-3.4595***
(0.9308)
5.5128***
(1.6123)
0.6416***
(0.1790)
-0.1799**
(0.0785)
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
623
0.249

Note: P ≠ 0 is the posterior inclusion probability that a regressor’s posterior mean is different
from zero. *, **, ***, indicate 90, 95, 99 percent significance levels.

32

Table 2
Reduced-Form BMA Results (By City)
Dependent Variable: Log median SO2 concentrations, 5-year averages

Intercept

P≠0
100.0

Trade

96.5

Executive Constraints

92.5

Precipitation Variation

92.0

(GDP t-3)2

81.4

(GDP t-3)3

81.0

GDP t-3

66.2

Year

40.9

Education t-3

19.6

Investment

19.3

Helsinki

10.9

(GDP)2

7.3

(GDP)3

6.9

GDP

6.7

Capital Intensity, H*K/L

6.2

(Capital Intensity, H*K/L)2

5.0

Temperature

3.7

National Population Density

3.3

Observations
2

R

Posterior Mean
(S.D.)
15.8235
(27.8085)
-2.1790
(0.8050)
-0.1626
(0.0691)
42.6770
(18.5787)
-2.8631
(2.1788)
0.5922
(0.4306)
3.5128
(3.3483)
-0.0102
(0.0144)
0.0318
(0.0771)
-0.0038
(0.0092)
0.0306
(0.1114)
0.0317
(0.9982)
-0.0049
(0.1987)
-0.0526
(1.4550)
0.0041
(0.0328)
-0.0001
(0.0013)
-0.0013
(0.0167)
0.0027
(0.1190)

Best Model Mean
(S.D.)
-4.5770***
(1.1233)
-2.5691***
(0.7329)
-0.1916***
(0.0601)
51.0975***
(15.1028)
-3.8403***
(1.2763)
0.7824***
(0.2412)
4.9447**
(2.2508)
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
263
0.319

Note: P ≠ 0 is the posterior inclusion probability that a regressor’s posterior mean is different
from zero. *, **, ***, indicate 90, 95, 99 percent significance levels.

33

Table 3
Reduced-Form BMA Results (By Country)
Dependent Variable: Log median SO2 concentrations, 5-year averages

Intercept

P≠0
100.0

Executive Constraints

99.9

Precipitation Variation

99.8

Temperature

98.4

Trade

96.9

Education t-3

96.0

Year

86.7

(GDP t-3)2

32.8

(GDP t-3)3

18.3

GDP t-3

14.0

GDP

13.7

Helsinki

12.2

(GDP)2

10.9

(GDP)3

10.7

Investment

6.4

National Population Density

5.7

Capital Intensity, H*K/L

5.4

(Capital Intensity, H*K/L)2

5.2

Observations
R2

Posterior Mean
68.7436
(37.1783)
-0.2090
(0.0503)
59.4164
(14.9510)
-0.3317
(0.1022)
-1.7149
(0.6302)
0.4405
(0.1659)
-0.0352
(0.0190)
-0.2129
(0.6308)
0.0159
(0.1381)
-0.0003
(0.7992)
0.1433
(0.6564)
-0.0370
(0.1389)
0.0122
(0.2817)
0.0046
(0.0724)
-0.0006
(0.0039)
0.0207
(0.1726)
0.0005
(0.0172)
-0.0001
(0.0008)

Best Model Mean
87.6426***
(28.8034)
-0.1977***
(0.0585)
59.0806***
(17.5418)
-0.3732***
(0.1010)
-1.6653***
(0.6428)
0.4757***
(0.1499)
-0.0446***
(0.0149)
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
109
0.475

Note: P ≠ 0 is the posterior inclusion probability that a regressor’s posterior mean is different
from zero. *, **, ***, indicate 90, 95, 99 percent significance levels.

34

Table 4 – Structural BMA Results

Intercept

Antweiler et.
al.. (2001)
Mean
-4.299***

Executive Constraints

Station
Posterior
P≠0
Mean
(S.D.)
100.0
0.3222
(1.6399)
100.0
-0.1756
(0.0289)

Best Model
Mean
(S.D.)
-0.4609
(1.0392)
-0.1796***
(0.0362)

P≠0
100.0
99.8

City
Posterior
Mean
(S.D.)
13.2930
(22.3105)
-0.1918
(0.0480)

Best Model
Mean
(S.D.)
3.4359***
(0.6951)
-0.2068***
(0.0555)

P≠0
100.0
100.0

Country
Posterior
Best Model
Mean
Mean
(S.D.)
(S.D.)
68.0096
80.1687**
(32.8857)
(26.7007)
-0.2256
-0.2204***
(0.0485)
(0.0555)

Precipitation Variation

10.716*

100.0

34.8079
(7.2113)

37.3753***
(8.5395)

99.0

43.0722
(12.0933)

50.0824***
(11.7568)

99.9

61.6432
(14.0204)

60.9896***
(16.4076)

Temperature

-0.056*

97.9

-0.1982
(0.0632)

-0.2211***
(0.0640)

8.3

-0.0090
(0.0360)

.

99.0

-0.2703
(0.0811)

-0.2584**
(0.0908)

3.5

0.0021
(0.0146)

.

18.4

0.0286
(0.0691)

.

97.3

0.4299
(0.1434)

0.4402**
(0.1407)

Education t-3
Trade * Relative GNP *
Relative H*K/L

0.924**

99.1

1.0575
(0.1911)

1.0328***
(0.1565)

100.0

1.2278
(0.2025)

1.3341***
(0.1824)

95.8

0.9502
(0.2965)

0.9269***
(0.2299)

Trade * Relative H*K/L

-2.121

96.7

-1.9773
(0.5573)

-2.0177***
(0.3687)

100.0

-2.6672
(0.4542)

-2.8994***
(0.4822)

93.3

-2.2308
(0.7765)

-2.3297***
(0.5214)

1.0

-0.00003
(0.0006)

.

43.7

-0.0086
(0.0116)

.

90.1

-0.0357
(0.0171)

-0.0420**
(0.0137)

0.008

4.6

-0.0002
(0.0008)

.

4.5

-0.0003
(0.0017)

.

25.8

-0.0039
(0.0083)

.

-0.386***

13.8

-0.0049
(0.0145)

.

12.7

-0.0066
(0.0206)

.

21.7

-0.0132
(0.0309)

.

Capital Intensity, H*K/L

0.437*

2.4

-0.0004
(0.0113)

.

1.9

0.0028
(0.0326)

.

21.3

0.0654
(0.1580)

.

GNPt-3

-0.228

41.2

-1.5901
(2.1203)

.

41.2

-0.8097
(1.4544)

-0.8371*
(0.4076)

16.7

-0.1733
(0.5087)

.

(City-GDP/km2)2/1,000

-0.340

3.9

0.0068
(0.0444)

.

5.0

0.0132
(0.0766)

.

15.9

0.0837
(0.2400)

.

-3.216**

4.7

0.0396
(0.2827)

.

2.2

-0.0127
(0.1538)

.

12.0

-0.2080
(0.7086)

.

31.3

-0.0051
(0.0085)

.

5.3

-0.0008
(0.0041)

.

11.7

-0.0021
(0.0072)

.

0.578***

38.6

0.3364
(0.4636)

.

20.1

0.1195
(0.3171)

.

9.5

-0.0266
(0.1456)

.

City-GDP/km2

-0.089*

3.9

0.0007
(0.0043)

.

4.8

0.0013
(0.0072)

.

7.9

0.0023
(0.0113)

.

(Trade * Relative GNP)2

-0.584**

7.2

0.0046
(0.0735)

.

14.8

-0.0240
(0.0656)

.

7.5

0.0265
(0.1405)

.

Trade * Relative GNP

2.614***

72.5

-0.6694
(0.5268)

-0.8745***
(0.2275)

7.4

-0.0359
(0.1484)

.

5.4

-0.0496
(0.3410)

.

1.4

0.0033
(0.0473)

0.3

0.0006
(0.0372)

.

4.9

0.0246
(0.1703)

.

-0.176

7.1

-0.0174
(0.0770)

.

2.0

-0.0031
(0.0315)

.

4.1

-0.0030
(0.0438)

.

(Communist * GNP)2

-8.806**

9.5

0.2867
(1.2680)

.

3.8

0.1840
(1.1342)

.

4.0

-1.2251
(15.8062)

.

Communist * GNP

9.639**

29.4

1.5302
(2.7148)

.

6.9

0.4436
(1.9749)

.

3.6

1.1847
(19.7346)

.

Helsinki

0.016

1.2

-0.0015
(0.0226)

.

9.4

0.0311
(0.1179)

.

2.7

0.0027
(0.0538)

.

Observations

2,555

Year
(Capital Intensity,
H*K/L)2
H*K/L * GNPt-3

Trade
Investment
(GNPt-3)2

National Population
Density
Trade * (Relative
H*K/L)2

Number of regressors
R2

653

273

115

18

6

5

7

0.15

.242

.341

.514

Note: P ≠ 0 is the posterior inclusion probability that a regressor’s posterior mean is different from zero. *,**, ***, indicate 95, 99, 99.9
percent significance levels. Antweiler et al. (2001) do not report standard errors

35

