How to Measure “What People Do For a Living” in
Research on the Socioeconomic Correlates of Health

John Robert Warren
Hsiang-Hui Kuo
Department of Sociology
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
Center for Studies in Demography and Ecology
University of Washington

July 2000

Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
Working Paper
No. 8

Draft: Do Not Cite or Quote Without Permission

_________________________
Paper to be presented at the annual meetings of the American Sociological Association,
Washington ,D.C., August 2000. Support for this research was provided by a grant from the
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences at the University of Washington. Data and
documentation from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study are available at
http://dpls.dacc.wisc.edu/WLS. Direct correspondence to John Robert Warren, University of
Washington, Department of Sociology, 202 Savery Hall, Box 353340, Seattle, WA 98195 or
email jrwarren@u.washington.edu.

Abstract

In this paper we ask two questions. First, is occupational standing associated with health
outcomes when health-related criteria are used to establish the relative standing of occupations?
This is especially interesting in light of recent evidence (Miech and Hauser 2000) that occupational
standing is not independently associated with health outcomes when occupations are ranked using
socioeconomic criteria. Second, are job characteristics more closely related to health outcomes than
occupational characteristics? We use data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study, which includes a
unique combination of occupational, job, and health measures. We find no independent
relationship between occupational standing and health, using socioeconomic or health-related
criteria. However, we do find a number of significant relationships between job characteristics
and health outcomes. We are led to conclude that what people do for a living does matter for their
health, above and beyond the effects of educational attainment, and that to assess the nature and
magnitude of the effects of what people do for a living on their health we should measure the
characteristics and requirements of their jobs, not of their occupations.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES
Social and health scientists have long been concerned with the impact of socioeconomic
circumstances on physical and mental health, and this interest seems to have grown markedly in recent
years (Kaplan et al. 1997). Medical as well as social science journals now regularly feature research
that considers the influence of education, occupation, income, and other variables on a variety of
medical and public health problems.

Our research is concerned with the measurement of

socioeconomic factors – particularly occupational and job characteritics – in this area of study. In this
paper we ask how conclusions about the health impacts of what people do for a living are affected by
how occupational and job characteristics are measured and operationalized.
Occupations and Health
Innumerable observers have reported an inverse relationship between occupational
standing (however measured) and mortality and morbidity rates (Marmot at al 1987; Kaplan and
Keil 1993; Marmot et al. 1997; Gregario et al. 1997; Borooah 1999; Goodman 1999; Manor et
al. 1999). For just two examples, Marmot, et al. (1997) showed that occupation affects selfreported health, rates of depression, and self-esteem in the United States and England and
Kitagawa and Hauser (1973) demonstrated that occupation affects mortality in the United States.
The fact that occupational standing and health outcomes are inversely related is not surprising in
light of research showing that other indicators of socioeconomic standing – such as income,
educational attainment, and wealth – are also negatively associated with these outcomes. Marks
and Shinberg (1997), for example, showed that education, income, and occupation are all
associated with the odds that a woman received a hysterectomy by age 52.
However, socioeconomic variables such as education and income are certainly correlated
with occupational standing. Thus a logical question is whether occupation, per se, directly

matters for health or whether the apparent association between occupation and health is spurious
owing to education, income, or other variables. Marks and Shinberg (1997) found that
occupation does have independent effects on the odds of receiving a hysterectomy after
controlling for education and income, but – using the same set of data in an examination of
different outcomes – Miech and Hauser (2000) found that “associations of health outcomes with
occupational standing net of educational attainment are mainly weak or non-existent.” As in
most prior research, Miech and Hauser (2000) utilized a variety of socioeconomic and classbased measures of the relative standing of occupations in their analyses. A central question in
our research is whether occupation matters for a variety of health outcomes when health-related
– as opposed to strictly socioeconomic – criteria are used to establish the relative standing of
occupations.
Selecting a Criterion for Ranking Occupations
Although any number of observers have reported an association between occupational standing
and health outcomes, very few of their analyses are directly comparable because of vast differences in
how occupation has been measured and operationalized.

This overabundance of measures of

occupational standing is understandable since the kind of work that a person does for a living can be
(and has been) characterized in terms of a wide array of attributes of that social activity, any of which
might matter for their health. Having a particular occupation – such as dishwasher, legal secretary, Xray technician, or high school teacher – is associated with particular levels of financial remuneration;
stress; social prestige; physical exertion; autonomy; non-monetary benefits; intellectual engagement;
exposure to hazardous materials; scheduling flexibility; and so forth. These and other attributes of
occupations are typically correlated – such that better paying occupations tend to be less physically
demanding, less hazardous, and less stressful, for example – but these correlations are far from perfect.

2

Researchers who aim to assess the impact of occupation, broadly speaking, on health thus face the
difficult task of measuring important aspects of occupation that might conceivably influence the health
outcomes that interest them.
In their analyses, many researchers classify subjects’ occupations as belonging to one of several
nominal categories, such as “white collar” or “blue collar.” Some of these categorization schemes
are more theoretically grounded than others. The “white collar” vs. “blue collar” distinction, for
example, seems to be based on simplicity or convenience, whereas Wright’s (1996) class
typology is solidly grounded in Marxist theory. Our comments on categorical schemes for
expressing occupations apply equally well to both. Using the former operationalization, the effects
of occupation on health are expressed as the conditional difference between “white collar” workers and
“blue collar” workers. This technique adequately captures the full impact of what people do for a
living on health outcomes if and only if all workers in a particular occupational category are exposed to
the same occupational hazards, are equally well paid, have equal levels of autonomy and authority, and
are equal with respect to every other job-related circumstance that might affect health. If workers
within a particular occupational category are heterogeneous with respect to these job-related
circumstances, then this operationalization likely leads to a biased assessment of the effects of
occupation on health.
Some social scientists use more refined systems to classify subjects’ occupations into one of
several hundred categories that can be ranked hierarchically in terms of some objective criteria and
treated as a continuous variable. For example, subjects’ occupations might be classified as belonging to
one of the 501 categories of the 1990 U.S. Census Occupational Classification. Several distinct
characteristics of these 501 occupations – for example, how much they typically pay (occupational
earnings), how prestigious they are considered to be (occupational prestige), how much education is

3

required (occupational education), and how frequently occupational incumbents are injured
(occupational injury rates) – have been ascertained from various sources, and can be matched to the
Census classification. The effects of occupation on health are then expressed as the conditional
association between health and a continuous measure of occupational standing.
The first problem with this approach is that it is not obvious which objective criteria researchers
should use to rank occupations. Unfortunately, the decision about which criteria to use tends to be
based more on convenience and tradition and less on theoretically derived notions of which aspect of
occupations might matter most for health outcomes. Most analysts express occupational standing in
terms of just one continuous measure (or in terms of a weighted average of two continuous measures,
such as Duncan’s 1961 Socioeconomic Index or SEI). How do conclusions about the effects of
occupation on health depend on which objective criteria is used to rank occupations? Miech and
Hauser (2000) found few effects, net of educational attainment, of occupational education, occupational
earnings, SEI, or prestige on a variety of health outcomes. We ask whether the use of health-relevant
criteria for establishing the relative standing of occupations – specifically occupational injury rates –
might reveal associations between occupation and health, even net of educational attainment.
The second potential problem with this approach is that if workers within a particular
occupational category are heterogeneous with respect to important job-related circumstances or
conditions, then this operationalization also leads to a biased assessment of the effects of occupation on
health. Specific jobs within occupational categories may be quite diverse in terms of health-relevant
variables.
These methodological issues surrounding the measurement of occupation are worth
worrying about because there is evidence that they matter for substantive conclusions. For
example, in the context of research on occupational stratification, Warren, Hauser, and Sheridan

4

(1998) showed that important substantive conclusions about gender differences in the process of
occupational stratification were quite sensitive to which criteria was used to rank the 503
occupations in the 1980 U.S. Census classification. Their work follows on the heels of research
showing that it matters (within the context of occupational stratification research) whether
occupations are ranked on the basis of how prestigious they are or on the basis of SEI
(Featherman and Hauser 1976; Featherman and Stevens 1982) and on whether occupations are
ranked on the basis of the characteristics of their male incumbents, their female incumbents, or
both (Boyd 1986; Nakao and Teas 1994).
There is also limited evidence that the way in which occupation is measured and
expressed matters for substantive conclusions about the health consequences of occupational
standing. For example, Miech and Hauser (2000) estimate the effects of occupation on a variety
of health outcomes, and in so doing they compare the predictive validity of several measures of
occupation: occupational prestige, SEI, occupational education, occupational earnings, Wright’s
(1997) social class typology, and Erikson and Goldthorpe’s (1992) social class typology.
Although those authors found few independent effects of any of their measures of occupational
standing on several health outcomes, they did find some interesting variability in the predictive
power of their measures. Most notably, occupational education had the greatest predictive
validity for some outcomes, while Wright’s and Erikson and Goldthorpe’s social class typologies
had the least predictive validity.
Job-Based Versus Occupation-Based Measures of “What People Do For a Living”
Jobs and occupations are not the same thing (Hauser and Carr 1995). A job is a specific
bundle of activities, responsibilities, and behaviors that typically results in financial
remuneration; there may be as many jobs as there are employed people. An occupation, on the

5

other hand, is a convenient aggregation of jobs that are similar in some respect. Regardless of
how occupations are grouped or which criteria are used to rank them, within-occupation category
heterogeneity in health-relevant aspects of jobs may bias the estimated effects of occupation on
health outcomes. That is, to the extent that those aspects of jobs that affect health vary within
occupational categories, our analyses of the effects of that aspect of jobs on health will likely be
biased. While standard practice has been to ascertain respondents’ occupations and then assign
to each respondent the aggregate characteristics of people in that occupation, Hauser and Carr
(1995: 40) note that “the best way to collect job information relevant to health and well-being
may be to ask directly about the conditions of work.” Thus a central question in our analysis is
what difference it makes for research on the association between health and what people do for a
living when the latter is expressed in terms of the characteristics of each respondent’s working
conditions instead of in terms of the conditions typical of people who do similar kinds of work.
We wonder whether job-based (as opposed to occupation-based) measures of what
people do for a living might be more closely associated with health outcomes. Consider the
findings of Link, Lennon, and Dohrenwend (1993), who conclude that occupational direction,
control, and planning affect depression/distress; Link, Dohrenwend, and Skodol (1986), who
show that noisome work conditions are important in the etiology of schizophrenia; and Karasek
and colleagues (Karasek al. 1981; Karasek et al. 1988), who argue that high job demands and
decision-making latitude affect coronary hear disease. In each case, it seems plausible that there
is a great deal of variation in relevant job characteristics within each of the 500 or so U.S. Census
occupational categories. By aggregating to the occupation level, prior research may be missing
important information about the relationship between “what people do for a living” and health.

6

In our research we ask two specific questions. First, is occupational standing associated with a
variety of health outcomes when health-related criteria – occupational injury rates – are used to
establish the relative standing of occupations? Second, how might heterogeneity in what people do
for a living within each of the hundreds of occupational categories influence conclusions about the
association between what people do for a living and health? That is, might job characteristics be more
closely related to health outcomes than occupational characteristics? Miech and Hauser (2000)
concluded that when utilizing the socioeconomic criteria typically used to establish the relative standing
of occupations – occupational education, occupational earnings, SEI, and prestige – there appear to be
few and weak associations between occupation and health net of educational attainment. This implies
that what people do for a living doesn’t matter for their health once their education has been accounted
for. We ask whether this finding persists when we use alternate criteria to rank occupations or when we
use job-based characteristics of what people do for a living.
Data
We use data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS). The WLS has followed a cohort
of 10,317 Wisconsin high school graduates from their senior year of high school in 1957 through the
early 1990s (with a remarkably high rate of sample retention). The WLS data are especially useful for
our purposes. Respondents’ occupations at age 52-53 were coded to the standards of the 1990 Census,
such that they can be mapped into occupation-based measures like those described above. In addition,
the WLS questionnaire ascertained the details of respondents’ job characteristics – like how often they
get dirty, how much autonomy they have, how often they are exposed to hazardous materials, how
they rate their jobs relative to an average job, and so forth. The 1993 mail survey of WLS respondents
also contains rich information about a large selection of self-reported health outcomes and medical
conditions at age 52 or so. Each of these occupation, job, and health measures are described below.

7

Care must be taken when generalizing from results derived from analyses of WLS data.
Sample members are all 52-53 year old high school graduates and are almost universally White.
About one in five is of farm origins, and about 70 percent still lived in Wisconsin 35 years after
their graduation from high school. However, prior research has profitably used WLS data for
research on socioeconomic gradients in health (Hauser and Carr 1995; Marmot et al 1997;
Marks and Shinberg 1997; Miech and Hauser 2000) and the WLS’s unique combination of
occupational, job, and health measures make these data most suitable for our purposes.
In selecting our analysis sample, we began by determining the four most prevalent selfreported health problems and the five most prevalent self-reported medical conditions for both
men and women. We then selected all cases with no missing data on these health outcome
variables or on educational attainment, current or last occupation in 1992/3, or the job
characteristic variables that we describe below. This sample selection scheme leaves us with
85% – 5,818 of 6,875 – of the respondents who participated in the 1993 WLS mail survey.
Measuring Occupational and Job Characteristics
Table 1 describes variables representing educational attainment and occupational
standing, separately for men and women. Educational attainment is measures as years of school
completed; by definition, all sample members have completed at least 12 years of schooling.
We use four measures of the socioeconomic characteristics of occupations and six measures of
the injury-related characteristics of occupations. Occupational prestige represents the relative
desirability or goodness of an occupation, and is based on the subjective ranking of occupations
by respondents to the 1989 General Social Survey (Nakao and Treas 1994). Prior work has
established the invariability of these and other relative prestige ratings; regardless of sex, social
class, industrialized country, or instructions about how to rank occupations, respondents tend to

8

agree about the relative prestige position of detailed occupational categories. Nakao-Treas
prestige scores range from 0 to 100, where higher numbers represent more desirable
occupations. Our measures of occupational education and occupational earnings were
constructed by Hauser and Warren (1997) for use with the 1990 Census Occupational
Classification. Occupational education is based on the proportion of incumbents in each
occupation who completed one or more years of college. Occupational earnings is based on the
proportion of incumbents in each occupation who earned more than $25,000 in 1989. Each of
these proportions was transformed into a started logit of the form log[(p + .01)/(1 - p + .01)],
where p is the proportion of the occupational incumbents above the threshold. This
transformation reduces heteroscedasticity in the transformed variable without creating extreme
outliers (Mosteller and Tukey 1977:109-115; Hauser and Warren 1997), and yields measures
that range from about –4.5 to about 4.5 in our sample. Finally, we use a nominal categorization
of occupations that further aggregates respondents’ occupations into 17 major occupation groups
such as “professional and technical specialty occupations” and “administrative support
occupations.” This measure corresponds to (frequently less detailed) nominal classifications
often used in research in this area of research.
All injury-related occupational characteristics are derived from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics’ 1994 Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses. These data report the occupationspecific number and cause of nonfatal occupational injuries and illnesses involving days away
from work in 1993, the year that most WLS respondents reported the characteristics of their
current or most recent jobs and occupations. For each occupation category we computed rates
of occupational injuries by dividing the number of injuries in that occupation in 1993 by the total
number of people who held that occupation according to data from the 1990 U.S. Census. The

9

“total occupational injury rate” simply reflects the number of occupational injuries per 10,000
occupational incumbents in 1993. The other five occupational injury rates are cause-specific.
For example, the “slip or fall occupational injury rate” reflects the number of occupational
injuries due to slipping or falling per 10,000 incumbents in 1993. Because of the skewed
distributions of the occupational injury rate variables, we have transformed them by adding a
small constant at taking their natural logarithm.
Although we wonder whether occupational injury rates might be more closely related to
health outcomes than occupational socioeconomic characteristics, we acknowledge that these
measures are not ideal. We would prefer to have measures of the extent to which occupational
incumbents are exposed to dangerous conditions, do repetitive work, overexert themselves, and
so forth. However, we are only able to use indirect indicators of these things. We are forced to
assume that if injuries due to overexertion, for example, are high in a particular occupation, then
people who hold that occupation are required to overexert themselves more often than people in
other occupations.
Table 2 reports the correlations among these socioeconomic and injury-related
occupational characteristics (with the exception of the Group II measure, which is a nominal
variable). The top three rows of the table show that the socioeconomic occupational
characteristics are highly inter-correlated; likewise, the rightmost 6 columns show that the
occupational injury rate measures are highly inter-correlated. More interestingly, the remaining
cells of the table indicate that the socioeconomic and injury-related characteristics of
occupations are quite closely related. The correlations of occupational injury rates with
occupational prestige and occupational education range between –0.55 and –0.66; their
correlations with occupational earnings are more modest, ranging from –0.32 to –0.53. Simply

10

put, occupations that enjoy higher social esteem, that require more educational credentials, and
that tend to pay better are typically much safer occupations.
Table 3 describes variables that characterize respondents’ jobs. Many of the job
characteristic measures are loosely parallel to measures of occupational characteristics. For
example, WLS respondents were asked how much education most people in jobs like their have
(paralleling the occupational education measure), how many hours they spend on their jobs doing
the same things over and over (paralleling the repetition occupational injury rate), and how often
they are exposed to disease agents, dangerous equipment, or hazardous chemicals (paralleling the
exposure occupational injury rate). Other measures indicate whether respondents’ jobs require
lots of physical effort, require intense concentration or attention, require working under the
pressure of time, or involve getting dirty. Respondents were also asked how many hours they
spend working with their hands, tools or equipment and how many hours they spend dealing with
people about work. The WLS contains other measures of job characteristics, but we have
selected a set of measures that might conceivably have implications for respondents’ health. For
example, respondents who work in jobs that require lots of physical effort, that involve getting
dirty, that are repetitious, and/or that involve exposure to dangerous or hazardous conditions
might quite reasonably have poorer health outcomes than respondents who work in other jobs.
Likewise, jobs that involve stressors – such as intense concentration, time pressure, or dealing
with people – might have different consequences for jobholders than less stressful jobs.
Measuring Health Problems and Medical Conditions
Table 4 describes variables pertaining to respondents’ self-reported health problems and
medical conditions. For both men and women we begin with self-reported overall health.
Respondents were asked, “How would you rate your health at the present time?” Because of the

11

distribution of responses, we group respondents into those who said “good” or “excellent” and
those who said “fair,” “poor,” or “very poor.” Interestingly, this self-reported overall health
measure is closely related to clinically diagnosed health problems and is a better predictor of
mortality than physician-assessed health (Mossey and Shapiro 1982).
WLS respondents were presented with a list of 24 health problems and asked whether
they had experienced them in the past six months. They were then asked to report the frequency
with which they experienced each problem and how much discomfort each problem had caused
them in the past six months. For each self-reported health problem, we coded a respondent as
having that problem if they reported experiencing it at least daily in the past six months and
indicated that it caused them at least some discomfort. As noted earlier, our analyses consider
only the four most frequently self-reported health problems for men and the four most frequently
self-reported health problems for women. As it turns out, three of these health problems – back
pain or strain, stiff or swollen joints, and aching muscles – are frequently experienced by both
men and women. Male respondents also frequently report experiencing ringing in their ears and
female respondents frequently report having trouble sleeping.
WLS respondents were also presented with a list of 17 medical conditions and asked
whether a medical professional says they have that condition. Here we selected the five medical
conditions most frequently reported by men and the five medical conditions most frequently
reported by women. Four medical conditions – high blood pressure, arthritis or rheumatism,
allergies, and serious back problems – are frequently experienced by both men and women.
Men also frequently report experiencing heart problems and women frequently report circulation
problems. Respondents were also asked how much each condition interferes with what they like
to do, but we have not taken this information into account; high blood pressure, for example, is

12

still a serious medical condition even if it does not directly interfere with respondents’ daily
lives.
Results
We ask two central questions. First, net of educational attainment, is occupation associated
with health outcomes when occupational injury rates are used to establish the relative standing
of occupations? Second, are job characteristics more closely and independently associated with
health outcomes than occupational characteristics? Following Miech and Hauser (2000), we begin by
estimating the effect of educational attainment on an outcome, and then ask whether the addition of a
given occupational or job characteristic variables adds to the fit of the model. Our decisions about
improvement in model fit are initially based on standard χ2 tests, but we temper our conclusions by
using the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) as suggested by Raftery (1995). BIC provides a
better-calibrated assessment of the evidence for a hypothesis than P-values in analyses of data from
large samples. Our tests of statistical significance compare the fit of models that do not include job or
occupational characteristics variables to those that do.
Table 5 reports the results of models predicting self-reported health problems and
medical conditions for men, and Table 6 reports these results for women. The first row of each
table suggests – with a few exceptions – that educational attainment has negative and
statistically significant effects on these health outcomes. For men, educational attainment is
significantly related to all 10 outcomes using conventional criteria for statistical significance and
to 7 of these outcomes using the more conservative BIC. For women, conventional significance
criteria show an effect of education in 8 of 10 cases, but BIC suggests that only four of these
associations are very robust.

13

The next section of Tables 5 and 6 reports the improvement in model chi-square
associated with adding measures of the socioeconomic characteristics of occupations. This
section of our analysis loosely replicates part of the work of Miech and Hauser (2000), although
they used the 1970 Census Occupational Classification and a slightly different subset of
respondents. Our results, however, are quite similar. Using conventional standards of
statistical significance, occupational prestige, occupational education, occupational earnings,
and Group II occupation categories are associated with health outcomes about a quarter of the
time for men (with those associations most frequently involving occupational education and
occupational earnings) and almost never for women. In only one case for men and in no cases
for women do any of these associations approach statistical significance using BIC. That is, like
Miech and Hauser (2000), we find that significant associations between health outcomes and
socioeconomic measures of occupational standing are very much the exception to the rule.
Injury-related measures of occupational standing seem to fare little better. The next
section of Tables 5 and 6 reports the improvement in model chi-square associated with adding
injury-related measures of occupations standing. For men, only twice does the addition of
occupational injury rate information add to the fit of the model, and both associations are weak
or non-existent using BIC. For women, occupational injury rates appear to be particularly
associated with aching muscles and arthritis or rheumatism, and overall – again, using standard
criteria for assessing statistical significance – about one in six null hypotheses are rejected.
However, using BIC, only one of these associations appears to be robust.
The final section of Tables 5 and 6 reports the improvement in model chi-square
associated with adding job characteristic variables. For men, at least one job characteristic
affects 8 of 10 health outcomes using the conventional chi-squared criteria; indeed, we would

14

reject the null hypothesis of no association in 23 of these 110 models. For aching muscles and
arthritis or rheumatism, 6 of the 11 measures have significant effects for men. In the models for
women, at least one job characteristic affects 9 of 10 health outcomes, and – still using
conventional criteria for hypothesis testing – we would reject the null model in 37 of 110 cases.
For women, 7 of the 11 measures affect aching muscles, 5 of 11 affect arthritis or rheumatism,
and 5 of 11 affect circulation problems. When we use BIC to assess statistical significance, we
reject the null hypothesis in only 8 cases for men and 11 for women. That is, most of the
associations which are significant by conventional standards are not significant using the bettercalibrated BIC standards.
The associations that remain using the Bayesian Inference Criteria are interesting. Of the
8 significant effects of job characteristics for men, 4 affect aching muscles. The typical
education level of jobholders, hours spent working with hands, repetitive work, and exposure to
dangerous equipment all affect the odds that a man experienced discomfort from aching muscles
at least daily in the past six months. Thus for men, dangerous, repetitive, hands-on work seems
to be associated with aching muscles. Men whose jobs involve frequently repetitive work are
also more likely to report discomfort from stiff or swollen joints, and those whose jobs involve
frequent physical effort are more likely to experience arthritis or rheumatism. Finally, men who
frequently deal with people and who are exposed to disease agents are more likely to suffer from
allergies.
For women, frequent physical effort, frequent time pressure, and getting dirty all affect
the odds of discomfort from aching muscles. Women whose jobs involve exposure to
dangerous equipment are more likely to experience back pain or strain, and those whose jobs
require frequent physical effort and time pressure are more likely to have been diagnosed with

15

serious back problems. Finally, women are more likely to suffer from circulation problems if
their jobs require frequent physical effort or getting dirty.
From a public health point of view, we do not wish to make too much of the significant
associations involving job characteristics shown in Tables 5 and 6. Many of the associations
seem to have some face validity – it makes sense that men who do repetitive work have aching
muscles and stiff or swollen joints, and that women whose jobs require frequent physical effort
experience aching muscles and serious back problems – but our methods of selecting job
characteristics and health outcomes were not designed to yield substantive findings about
particular health problems. They were the data at our disposal. Tables 5 and 6 demonstrate that
some job characteristics have independent effects on some health outcomes, whereas almost no
occupational characteristics have any independent effects. For any particular health outcome,
our 11 job characteristics are not necessarily the most pertinent or consequential aspect of what
people do for a living. For the medical condition “serious back problem” we might like to
know, for example, how often subjects lift objects and how heavy those objects are.
Conversely, for any particular job characteristic, these health outcomes are not necessarily the
health outcomes most likely to be affected. We might speculate, for instance, that the job
characteristic “frequent intense concentration” might affect the odds of discomfort from eye
strain.
Discussion
We began by asking two questions. First, we asked whether occupational standing is
associated with health outcomes when health-related criteria – occupational injury rates – are used
to establish the relative standing of occupations. From the work of Miech and Hauser (2000) we
expected that socioeconomic characteristics of occupations (occupational prestige, occupational

16

education, and occupational earnings) would not be associated with these outcomes, but we
wondered whether occupational standing might be associated with these outcomes when the
criteria used to rank occupations is more proximally related to health. Our results conform to
those of Miech and Hauser (2000), but the answer to our own question is clearly “no.”
Occupational injury rates are not associated with the health outcomes that we considered after
controlling for educational attainment. As discussed above, however, occupational injury rates
may not be ideal measures of occupational incumbents’ exposure to risk factors for various
health problems or medical conditions. The strong associations between occupational injury
rates and occupational socioeconomic characteristics suggest that such measures might be put to
interesting use in research on occupational stratification, but their utility for research on health
outcomes appears to be limited – at least for the outcomes we considered.
Second, we asked how heterogeneity in work experiences within occupational categories might
influence conclusions about the relationships between what people do for a living and their health. To
address this, we considered whether job – as opposed to occupational – characteristics are more closely
related to health outcomes after controlling for educational attainment. Here, the answer is a qualified
“yes.” Some job characteristics are independently related to some of the health outcomes that we
considered, even using the more stringent BIC criteria for assessing statistical significance. The
significant associations make intuitive sense, although not all of the intuitively sensible associations
(e.g., between frequency of working with hands and arthritis or rheumatism) were significant. We are
led to conclude that what people do for a living does matter for their health, above and beyond the
effects of educational attainment, and that to assess the nature and magnitude of the effects of what
people do for a living on their health we should measure the characteristics and requirements of their
jobs, not of their occupations.

17

With that said, we are not willing to make any substantive conclusions about the
relationships between any of the job characteristics that we used and any of the health outcomes
that we considered. In order to do so, we would need to follow methods of selecting measures of
job characteristics that are quite different from those employed in this research. If our goal were
to assess the association between what people do for a living and their odds of developing a
particular medical condition, we would begin by cataloging the risk factors for that medical
condition. We would then collect information from respondents about the extent to which they
are exposed to each of those risk factors on the job. Subjects may well be exposed to those same
risk factors away from the job as well, so we would need to be careful to assess the added and
unique exposure to those risk factors associated with on the job activities and conditions.
With information about all job characteristics relating to risk factors for a particular
medical condition in hand, we would then be in a position to assess the association between what
people do for a living and that particular medical condition. Of course different medical
conditions have different risk factors, and so the information that we would want to gather about
job characteristics might differ if our focus is on another medical condition. In the present study,
we simply selected a set of 11 job characteristics that seemed like they might reasonably have
mattered for people’s health – whether they get dirty, how frequently they are exposed to
dangerous chemicals, and so forth – but we had no a priori reason for expecting those specific
job characteristics to matter for any particular health problem or medical condition.
The fact that some of them did matter should encourage researchers to collect and use
information about what people do for a living in investigations of the relationship between
socioeconomic status and health. What we are suggesting, of course, is that researchers who
collect data for the purpose of assessing the association between socioeconomic status and health

18

should include specific, detailed, and health outcome-specific survey questions about job
characteristics in their surveys. It may well be possible and desirable to develop a standard set of
survey questions that captures everything we would want to know about people’s jobs in
research on socioeconomic differentials in particular health outcomes. It means, however, that
we must first put some thought and effort into determining what we would want to know about
people’s jobs for research on any particular health problem or medical condition.
Beyond issues of measurement, we must also recognize that cross-sectional data are not
perfectly suited to assessing the association between what people do for a living and their health.
(Our data are, in fact, longitudinal, but measures of job characteristics and health outcomes are
available only in the most recent wave of survey data.) People change jobs, and thus they
change the extent to which they are exposed to health-relevant working conditions and the
frequency with which they engage in health-relevant activities. It seems reasonable to suppose,
furthermore, that people sometimes change jobs because of their health or because former jobs
put their health at risk in some way. A more complete understanding of the impact of what
people do for a living on health outcomes would need to focus longitudinally on the
characteristics of prior jobs as well as those of the jobs that respondents hold at the time that their
health outcomes are assessed.

19

References

Borooah, VK. 1999. “Occupational Class and the Probability of Long-Term Limiting Illness.” Social
Science and Medicine 49: 253-266.
Boyd, Monica. 1986. “Socioeconomic Indices and Sexual Inequality: A Tale of Scales.” Canadian
Review of Sociology and Anthropology 23:457-480.
Duncan, Otis D. 1961. “A Socioeconomic Index for All Occupations.” Pp. 109-138 in Occupations and
Social Status, edited by Albert J. Reiss Jr. New York: Free Press.
Featherman, David L. and Robert M. Hauser. 1976. “Prestige or Socioeconomic Scales in the Study of
Occupational Achievement?” Sociological Methods & Research 4:403-22.
Featherman, David L. and Gillian Stevens. 1982. “A Revised Socioeconomic Index of Occupational
Status: Application in Analysis of Sex Differences in Attainment.” Pp. 93-129 in Measures of
Socioeconomic Status, edited by Mary Powers. Boulder: Westview Press.
Gregorio, David I., Stephen J. Walsh, and Deborah Paturzo. 197. “The Effects of Occupation-Based
Social Position on Mortality in a Large American Cohort.” American Journal of Public Health
87:1472-1475.
Hauser, Robert M. and Deborah Carr. 1995. “Measuring Poverty and Socioeconomic Status in Studies
of Health and Well-Being.” Working Paper 94-24, Revised 1995. Madison, WI: Center for
Demography and Ecology.
Hauser, Robert M. and John Robert Warren. 1997. “Socioeconomic Indexes of Occupational Status: A
Review, Update, and Critique.” Pp. 177-298 in Sociological Methodology, 1997, edited by
Adrian Raftery. Cambridge: Blackwell.
Kaplan, GA and JW Lynch. 1997. “Editorial: Whither Studies on the Socioeconomic Foundations of
Population Health?” American Journal of Public Health 87:1409-1411.

20

Kaplan, GA and JE Keil. 1993. “Socioeconomic Factors and Cardiovascular Disease: A Review of the
Literature.” Circulation 88:1973-1988.
Karasek, R, D Baker, F Marxer, A Ahlbom, and T Theorell. 1981. “Job Decision Latitude, Job
Demands, and Cardiovascular Disease: A Prospective Study of Swedish Men.” American
Journal of Public Health 71:694-705.
Karasek, R, T Theorell, JE Schwartz, RL Schnall, CF Pieper, and JL Michela. 1988. “Job
Characteristics in Relation to the Relevance of Myocardial Infarction in the U.S. Health
Examination Survey (HES) and the Health and Nutrition Exaination Study (HANES).”
American Journal of Public Health 78:910-918.
Kitagawa, Evely and Philip M. Hauser. 1973. Differential Mortality in the United States: A Study in
Socioeconomic Epidemiology. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Link, Bruce G., Bruce P. Dohrenwend, and Andrew E. Skodol. 1986. “Socioeconomic Status and
Scizophrenia: Noisome Occupational Characteristics as a Risk Factor.” American Sociological
Review 51:242-258.
Link, Bruce G., Mary Clare Lennon, and Bruce P. Dohrenwend. 1993. “Socioeconomic Status and
Depression: The Role of Occupational Direction, Control, and Planning.” American Journal of
Sociology 98:1351-1387.
Manor, O, Z Eisenbach, E Peritz, and Y Friedlander. 1999. “Mortality Differentials Among Israeli
Men.” American Journal of Public Health 89:1807-1813.
Marks, Nadine F. and Diane S. Shinberg. 1997. “Socioeconomic Differences in Hysterectomy: The
Wisconsin Longitudinal Study.” American Journal of Public Health 87:1507-1514.
Marmot, MG, M Kogevinas, and MA Elsten. 1987. “Social/Economic Status and Disease.” Annual
Review of Public Health 8:111-135.

21

Marmot, Michael, Carol D. Ryff, Larry L. Bumpass, Martin Shipley, and Nadine F. Marks. 1997.
“Social Inequalities in Health: Next Questions and Converging Evidence.” Social Science and
Medicine 44:901-910.
Miech, Richard A. and Robert M. Hauser. 1998. “Social Class Indicators and Health at Midlife.”
Working Paper 98-06. Madison, WI: Center for Demography and Ecology.
Mossey, JM and E Shapiro. 1982. “Self-Rated Health: A Predictor of Mortality among the Elderly.”
American Journal of Public Health 72:800-808.
Mosteller, Frederick, and John W. Tukey. 1977. Data Analysis and Regression: A Second
Course in Statistics. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley.
Nakao, Keiko and Judith Treas. 1994. “Updating Occupational Prestige and Socioeconomic Scores:
How the New Measures Measure Up.” Pp. 1-72 in Sociological Methodology, 1994, edited by
Peter Marsden. Washington, D.C.: American Sociological Association.
Raftery, AE. 1995. “Bayesian Model Selection in Social Research.” Pp. 111-163 in Sociological
Methodology 1995, Peter Marsden, editor. Cambridge: Basil Blackwell.
Sewell, WH and RM Hauser. 1975. Education, Occupation, and Earnings: Achievement in the Early
Career. New York: Academic Press.
Warren, John Robert, Robert M. Hauser, and Jennifer T. Sheridan. 1998. “Choosing a Measure of
Occupational Standing: How Useful are Composite Measures I Analyses of Gender Inequality
in Occupational Attainment?” Sociological Methods & Research 27:1 – 76.
Wright, Erik O. 1996. Class Counts: Comparative Studies in Class Analysis. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

22

