Computational Models Frame New and Outstanding Biological Questions of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis

Jerusha T. Achterberg 1
University of Washington, Seattle

Working Paper no. 93
Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences
University of Washington
October 22, 2009.

1

Jerusha T. Achterberg is a graduate student in the Department of Anthropology, University of Washington, Box 353100, Seattle,
WA 98195-3100. She holds an MPH in epidemiology, and will complete her PhD in biocultural anthropology in spring of 2010.
Email: jerusha@u.washington.edu. The author is grateful to Steve Goodreau and Patricia Kramer for comments and support.

1

Tuberculosis (TB), a bacterial infection commonly expressed in the respiratory tract, is the leading
infectious killer worldwide; it is estimated that one-third of the world is currently infected with TB, and it results
in 3 million deaths every year (WHO 2005). This paper reviews the applications of mathematical tuberculosis
models in the last 10 years, and constructs a framework through which the various model applications can be
categorized and synthesized. This presentation emphasizes how mathematical models both bridge and highlight
gaps in current tuberculosis research.
There are many aspects of tuberculosis that have been explored using mathematical models; the majority
explore the dynamics of TB spread among individual people in a population. However, there has been some
work modeling intra-individual action of TB. Though these non-inter-individual models are mathematically
comparable to inter-individual TB models, they represent a minority of the literature. This review therefore
focuses on models that make up most of the TB modeling literature, those that explore the dynamics of TB
among individuals. These models can be divided at the broadest level by motivation into policy and history, and
biology. Models emphasizing policy and history explore topics including environmental control measures,
population-level TB control, and historical trends analyses. Those models that address biological questions are
either question-specific or general models—including the loose categories of transmission dynamics and
heterogeneity incorporation—and are often used as templates for further investigation. Specific biological
questions are focused on four main themes: molecular evidence; human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and TB
comorbidity; multidrug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) prevalence and control; and exogenous reinfection. 2
TUBERCULOSIS DISEASE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY:
TB incidence and mortality vary by geographic region, subpopulation, comorbidity, and degree of drug
resistance. Geographically, the biggest burden of TB falls in Southeast Asia: there are 1.5 million cases per year in
sub-Saharan Africa,.25 million cases per year in Eastern Europe and 3 million cases per year in Southeast Asia.
Nonetheless, TB is not limited to the developing world; in the United States, the incidence of tuberculosis
declined in the 20th century until 1985, when a 14% increase was recorded (Horne 1998). This recent TB
resurgence is indicative of the experience of many developed nations in the 20th and 21st Centuries. HIV is a
strong risk factor for developing active TB, and TB is the leading cause of death among HIV-positive
individuals. Of 4.1 million AIDS deaths in 2004, ~13% can be attributed to TB (WHO 2005). The increase in
HIV in the United States has had a large role in the resurgence of TB, as has the HIV/AIDS epidemic in subSaharan Africa. Almost 40% of HIV-infected patients develop active TB within a few months of exposure to
TB.
Tuberculosis is a bacterial infection caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. M. tuberculosis can attack any part
of the body such as the kidney, brain or spine, but 82% of patients show expression in the respiratory tract—
referred to as pulmonary tuberculosis. Symptoms include cough, chest pain, fever, blood or sputum production,
weakness, chills, night sweats and anorexia.
An individual with infectious TB expels bacteria into the air; airborne droplets containing tubercle bacilli
can then be inhaled by others and cause latent infection. A person who is only latently infected with TB (versus
actively diseased) is not contagious and may not show any clinical symptoms of illness, although s/he may test
positive to infection. Latent TB becomes active TB when the immune system cannot suppress the infection (see
Figure 1); this progression may follow soon after initial infection (primary progression), or many years later
through either endogenous reactivation or exogenous reinfection (CDC 2005).

2

A review of tuberculosis models from a mathematical and model-building standpoint has been extensively conducted by CastilloChavez and Song. Their review covers a comprehensive survey of the history of TB model building and mathematical advances in
disease modeling as applied to TB. Castillo-Chavez and Song (2004) classify the literature by its consideration of, and expansion on,
specific aspects of early TB models, including intrinsic mechanics of transmission, models incorporating density dependent
demography, cell-based models, geographic distribution, and control strategies. This subset of the TB modeling literature will therefore
be only briefly reviewed herein.

2

Susceptible

Birth

Active TB

Latent TB

Exposure

Recovery

Treatment

Progression

Non-infectious

Infectious

Positive tuberculin skin

Figure 1: Simplified stages of TB within a population. Movement from Susceptible to
latent TB depends on exposure; progression to active TB depends on the immune system;
movement to Recovery depends on treatment. All new births are susceptible (Achterberg
2001).

In individuals with latent TB infection, the lifetime risk for developing active TB is 10-20%; only a small
fraction (5-10%) develops active TB by primary infection. A weakened immune system increases the chance of
TB moving from the latently infected stage to the actively diseased stage. Babies, young children, and the elderly
often have weak immune systems, as do people with HIV/AIDS and other medical conditions (CDC 2005). In
individuals coinfected with HIV, the risk of moving from latent to active TB may exceed 10% annually (Corbett
et al. 2003). Individuals with active TB are contagious as long as active TB is present without treatment, and it is
estimated that each person with active TB will infect an average of 10-15 people each year (WHO 2005).
If a person has latent TB infection, medication can be taken for 6-9 months to prevent development of
active TB. Active TB can be cured with appropriate treatment (CDC 2005), though there is significant
disagreement about whether a permanent cure is possible, or whether individuals return to a latently infected
state from which they could again experience active TB. After taking medicine as prescribed for 2-3 weeks, an
individual is no longer infectious. Without treatment, 75% of active TB patients die within 5 years (CDC 2005).
Though >90% of actively infected individuals receive treatment in developed countries, the recent increase of
TB suggests that other factors are contributing to the transmission dynamics (Moghadas & Alexander 2004).
The Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine primes the immune system so that TB never develops once
an individual is infected. Globally, there is 85% usage of BCG vaccine, and protection rates from 0-80% have
been reported (Toossii & Ellner 1998). The most common diagnostic test for latent TB infection is the
tuberculosis skin test. A small amount of tuberculin is injected under the skin; after 2-3 days the area is examined
by a health care worker to assess infection. If an individual has only recently been exposed to TB, a skin test may
not yet show positive infection. Persons who have received a BCG vaccine may also have a positive tuberculin
skin test, greatly complicating its use as a screening tool (CDC 2005).
Tuberculosis is not equally distributed across the globe; TB incidence and mortality vary by geographic
region, comorbidity, subpopulation, and degree of drug resistance. Geographically, the biggest burden of TB falls
in Southeast Asia: there are 1.5 million cases per year in sub-Saharan Africa, .25 million cases per year in Eastern
Europe and 3 million cases per year in Southeast Asia. HIV is a strong risk factor for developing active TB, and
TB is the leading cause of death among HIV-positive individuals. Of 4.1 million AIDS deaths in 2004, ~13%
can be attributed to TB (WHO 2005). Almost 40% of HIV-infected patients develop active TB within a few
months of exposure to TB. The incidence of HIV varies by region, and directly affects the incidence of
tuberculosis in those regions.

3

MATHEMATICAL MODELING:
Mathematical models used for the spread of infectious disease are referred to as dynamic models because
they describe change over time; they have a long history in epidemiology and have been used in a wide variety of
diseases (Hethcote 2000), including measles, influenza, rubella and chicken pox (Feng et al. 2000). Most diseases
studied using modeling techniques have age-specific transmission rates and exhibit features of reoccurring
epidemics. They tend to have relatively short latent periods and relatively short contagious periods resulting in
permanent immunity in the infected individual. A unique feature of tuberculosis is the ambiguity in the biological
processes involved in disease transmission and activation; transmission is further complicated by the inclusion of
both biological and social factors. Hence, there have been relatively few attempts to use mathematical modeling
to describe the behavior of TB.
Tuberculosis models are either deterministic or stochastic. The models operate by defining states for
individuals within a population—essentially assigning individuals to subpopulation groups based on
characteristics such as ‘infected with,’ or ‘immune to,’ tuberculosis. Deterministic models have a finite number
of states, and specify rules by which individuals move from one state to another through a series of differential
equations. Stochastic models specify probabilities of movements between populations, and can therefore provide
probabilities of particular model outcomes. Agent-based models—
also referred to as microsimulations and individual-based models—represent a large set of individuals, each with
their own independent, defined characteristics. Unlike compartmental models, agent-based models consider
individuals as discrete entities. This information is updated at various time points, either stochastically (event
driven models) or periodically (regular discrete models). The level of detail of such models is only limited by
population size and computing power (Getz et al. 2006).
By far the most common type used in the TB modeling literature, deterministic models are based on a
series of classes, potentially including susceptibles, infected and recovered, lending the name “SIR models.”
Other possible classes include exposed, immune, and stages of disease (see Figure 2). The movement from one
class to another is defined by the modeler to reflect his/her understanding of tuberculosis epidemiology, and the
questions to be tested by the model. For example, a TB model may be an SEIR model, or it may be an SEI
model with no recovery.
Susceptible

Recovery

Infected

Figure 2: Simple SIR model structure (above). Expanded SEIR model structure (below).
Susceptible

Exposed

Infected

Recovery

In epidemiological models, R0 is defined as the basic reproduction number: the average number of
secondary infections produced from one infected individual in a totally susceptible population—a function of
contact rate, and degree and duration of infectivity. (R0 is also referred to as the basic reproduction ratio or basic
reproductive rate.) In a deterministic model, R0 is a threshold quantity that must be greater than one for an
infection to invade a new population and persist over time. However, because risk of infection may vary with
many factors (e.g., age, vaccination, and nutritional status), the determination and interpretation of R0 depends
on the susceptible population structure.
The net reproduction number, Ru, is an extension of the basic reproduction number, R0, that takes into
account populations that are not totally susceptible. The net reproduction number is therefore defined as the
4

average number of secondary infectious cases resulting from infection (or reinfection) by a typical infectious case
in a given population under given conditions. It too is a function of contact rate, and degree and duration of
infectivity, but is additionally a function of the limited number of susceptible individuals. Because Ru
incorporates existing infectious cases in the definition, it can be estimated using population data, whereas R0
cannot be directly measured (Vynnycky and Fine 1998).
A dynamic model is, by definition, a simplification of reality. Every population exhibits heterogeneity; the
degree of detail included in a model depends upon the goals of the modeler. In a deterministic model, a
heterogeneous population can be split into a finite number of subpopulations, each of which is homogeneous.
Then the epidemic dynamics are modeled deterministically with movement among subpopulations. However,
placing an individual into one of a series of subpopulations is problematic, because group boundaries may not be
mutually exclusive. Furthermore, many variations between individuals are better described by continuous rather
than categorical variables. However, categorical approaches are often simpler to use mathematically than models
including continuous variation, and model detail must be balanced against mathematical tractability (Getz et al.
2006). A second approach is described as an application of stochastic branching process theory where the R0
associated with each infectious case is allowed to vary. This approach is used to describe SARS, measles and
smallpox (Getz et al. 2006), and it is demonstrated that assumptions of homogeneity oversimplify epidemic
models of infectious disease such that estimates of R0 alone do not adequately describe disease dynamics. A
failure to consider heterogeneity therefore may seriously bias probability estimates of disease invasion or
prevalence. A third approach is to create discrete-time stochastic simulation models based on individuals. This
can be done in a network characterized by non-random associations between individuals.
Though complex, the process of creating a mathematical model forces the modeler to clarify disease
assumptions and parameters; model results can provide qualitative and quantitative results including basic
reproduction number and thresholds. They can be experimental tools for formulating and testing hypotheses,
answering key questions, and estimating sensitivity to parameter changes.

TUBERCULOSIS MODELING:
EARLY TUBERCULOSIS MODELING:
The first simple tuberculosis models appeared in the 1960s (Waaler et al. 1962; Brogger 1967; Ferebee
1967). Methodologically, key TB model formulations appeared quickly. Waaler et al. (1962) developed a linear
model for TB based on three compartments: susceptible, infected non-cases and infectious cases. ReVelle (1967)
clearly formulated the connection between TB prevalence and infection rate in his model using differential
equations.
The focus of most early models was to gain a better understanding of TB dynamics and to predict the
effects of particular interventions by finding numerical solutions. Modelers were not concerned with qualitative
analysis of the models and results, or the long-term behavior of TB as indicated by the models. These goals did
not change significantly with the introduction of more mathematically complex models (Blower et al. 1996).
Though early work on TB models dates to the 1960s, there was very little theoretical TB work done from
the 1970s to the early 1990s. This dearth may be due to the decrease in TB prevalence in developed nations, and
to the increased successful reliance on antibiotic treatment during that time span. However, the reemergence of
TB in the United States and other developed nations has prompted renewed interest in tuberculosis biology and
epidemiology. The evolution of drug-resistant TB strains and coinfection with HIV/AIDS has also increased
pressures to find new control measures. These pressures have been accompanied by an increase in TB modeling
work from the mid-1990s to the present.
THE LAST DECADE:
In the 1990s, research in tuberculosis modeling mainly focused on two areas: specific populations in time
and space, and general models that only focused on a portion of tuberculosis epidemiology. Much of this work
5

refines previously published models to reflect the improved understanding of tuberculosis epidemiology (Murray
& Salomon 1998; Dye & Williams 2000; Berkey et al. 1995), while applied work on tuberculosis tends to use nongeneralized models of specific populations (Rose et al. 2001; Chaulk 2000; Classen et al. 1999). Current
mathematical modeling of tuberculosis generally aims to investigate which variables control the pattern of
infection in individuals and groups, and how these variables affect or determine population-level incidence and
prevalence.

POLICY AND HISTORY:
Reflecting the upsurge in TB prevalence and awareness, many TB models specifically address policy
questions, including environmental control measures and practices, population-level TB control, and historical
trends analyses—most of which emphasize policy recommendations. Though these three categories are not
obviously parallel, they do reflect the major application areas of TB policy modeling efforts. Although most TB
modeling articles have implications for control measures, these pieces target specific control questions. They
represent a larger proportion of papers published on TB models in the late 1990s than currently, and those
published recently tend to emphasize non-western nations.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL:
Clinical TB treatment in hospital settings presents specific risks to hospital workers. In an effort to
protect these workers, a number of models specifically address the hospital environment in an effort to reduce
transmission risk. Given the increase in TB worldwide, the importance of nosocomial infection is also likely to
increase. Gammaitoni and Nucci (1997) use a deterministic model to explore environmental controls on TB with
particular emphasis on high risk procedures. They conclude that in the absence of administrative controls,
environmental controls cannot eliminate the risk of TB transmission during high risk procedures, particularly
when the infectivity of the source case increases. To better understand transmission risk to a variety of types of
workers, a simulation of a cohort of hospital employees is used to explore the speed at which TB incidence
changes and transmission occurs (Nicas and Seto 1997). Nicas and Seto do this by dividing a cohort of workers
into low-, medium-, and high-risk groups and conducted as a simulation. As with most TB models, further
classification is limited by the sparse parameter estimates reported in the literature.
In an effort to make hospital risk estimates more generalizable, Beggs et al. (2003) conduct a review of
the mass action model, the Riley et al. model, and Gammaitoni and Nucci’s model to show each model’s range
and application to TB. They determine that Gammaitoni and Nucci's generalized form (Gammaitoni & Nucci
1997) is best suited for modeling airborne transmission in ventilated spaces, and the greatest risk for TB
infection is during clinical procedures that produce large quantities of aerosolized quanta including
bronchoscopy or intubation. In addition to hospital procedures being risky, the hospital as an enclosed space
also poses a risk to hospital patients and visitors. Germicidal irradiation and other environmental controls as a
means to reduce TB transmission in a hospital waiting room are addressed by Ko et al. (2001).
Though a non-hospital setting, commercial airliners also represent enclosed spaces that may poses
significant risks for passengers. Using spatial variability in TB risk within an airplane cabin as a proxy for defining
a potentially infectious contact, Ko et al. (2004) build a sequential box model to characterize the risk of TB
transmission aboard an airliner; this is done with consideration of administrative and structural environmental
controls.
These models demonstrate the utility of modeling techniques for use in TB environmental health policy,
particularly in public health settings. With further research to quantify room mixing, proximity and host
susceptibility, it may be possible to more accurately formulate such models, and make increasingly reliable and
valid risk assessments.

6

POPULATION-LEVEL CONTROL:
Though population-level control models have much in common methodologically with general TB
models, their objectives are clearly focused on control methods; often, they are focused on a specific population
of interest. To determine the potential effects on TB incidence and mortality across regions from 1998-2030,
Murray and Salomon (1998) use a deterministic model to consider extensions to then-existing global control
strategies. Real population data are used to demonstrate the importance of global strategy changes in TB control.
The consideration of heterogeneity by geographic locale is extended by Debanne et al. (2000) in their model of
TB epidemiology; the authors consider disaggregated groups defined by race, ethnicity, age and geography. A
multivariate Markov chain model iss used to predict TB incidence both in the U.S. population at large, and by
the defined groups. Vaccination control strategies are explicitly compared by Lietman and Blower (2000). They
compare a model of preexposure vaccine to a postexposure vaccine model and consider the impact on TB
incidence and prevalence. Model results indicate that even moderately effective vaccines coupled with moderate
to high treatment rates can significantly reduce tuberculosis epidemics. Variations in vaccine efficacy are
considered by Gomes et al. (2004) in a deterministic model; they try to explain the variation in BCG vaccine
efficacy by determining a reinfection threshold, above which reinfection with TB is the principal type of
transmission. Treatment default rates also vary, and Biot et al. (2003) parameterize a deterministic model
following Vynnycky and Fine (1998) to take this into account. They further discus an economic analysis breaking
down the trade-off between the extra costs of treating relapsed patients, and the savings in future treatment
costs, addressing a gap in modeling literature that had previously failed to evaluate benefits of a suboptimal
treatment program.
A subset of population level models explores moderate-to-low development settings. Though they do
not explicitly test control strategies, Perelman et al. (2004) build a deterministic model of TB dynamics within a
Russian population using data from the Orlovskya oblast for the purpose of designing an effective Russian
control strategy. Ssematimba et al. (2005) use deterministic models to understand the role of density dependent
transmission of TB as based upon, and to make recommendations about, Internally Displaced Peoples’ Camps
(IDPCs) in Uganda. Using a chain-binomial model simulation, Akhtar et al. (2006) investigate TB spread and
control among households in Pakistan, including efficient diagnosis, segregation and chemotherapy. The authors
call for an assessment of population specific household demography as a way to devise TB control strategies. As
TB prevalence increases in developing nations, it is likely that more control centered models will be focused
specifically on these populations.
HISTORICAL TRENDS ANALYSES:
Those models which seek to explain historical trends generally do so with the intention of learning about
some aspect of TB epidemiology, and can be grouped by their use of U.S. or British TB data.
Using TB mortality data from the United States over the last century, Aparicio et al. (2000a) use a simple
deterministic model to investigate historical trends, specifically the time to active progression within an
individual, and the relationship to urban expansion and changing population density over time. Using an
expanded data set, Aparicio et al. (2002) again explore the rates of TB progression in a deterministic model,
producing evidence that the substantial decreases observed in TB incidence in the United States over the last
century are due to abrupt reductions in the time to active progression. U.S. data and Massachusetts data are used;
the similar results at these two population scales indicate possible validation of the model formulation.
Using TB mortality data from England and Wales, Vynnycky and Fine (1999) estimate average annual
effective contact rate since 1900 using a deterministic model. The model results indicate that each infectious case
contacted an average of 22 individuals in 1900 to sufficiently transmit TB; the number declined to 10 by 1950
and 1 by 1990. The authors suggest that these data are reasonable, because domestic crowding reduced over this
time period. However, this model assumes random mixing, which may be increasingly inaccurate over calendar
time. The England and Wales TB data from 1953-1990 was further explored using a deterministic
compartmental model (Pitman et al. 2002) to quantify the relative contribution of vaccination, chemotherapy and
chemoprophylaxis to the reduction of TB. The authors estimate that the numbers of TB cases averted from
7

1953-1990 by the use of chemoprophylaxis, vaccination and chemotherapy were 288,318 cases, 57,085 cases, and
206,996 cases respectively; preventive therapy has had the greatest impact on reducing transmission.
In these models of historical data trends, national and state level data are assumed to be aggregates of
average change in individual contact rates and patterns, and the results are interpreted in this manner when
drawing conclusions for future TB policy.

BIOLOGICAL QUESTIONS:
Those models that address biological questions take one of two forms; they take a general approach to
TB progression within a population, and use mathematical techniques and/or simulation to attempt to gain
biological insight, or they are created to address a specific question in TB biology or epidemiology—these articles
are grouped based on their main foci.

GENERAL TB MODELS:
Though some of these articles purport to have a specific motivating question, there is a mismatch
between the framing and the content of modeling methods. Other articles have as their explicit goal to build a
general working model. Though there is clear overlap, they have been grouped according to their emphasis on
“pure” transmission dynamics, or the emphasis on incorporating heterogeneity in its various forms.
As a group, these models represent—and are used as—templates by other researchers. The templates are
then modified and expanded as needed to address specialized research objectives. The existing discrepancies
among models and modelers may represent the selection of initial template model more so than a fundamental
disagreement on TB biology or epidemiology. Because these general models are so frequently cited by emerging
literature, it is important to understand their history.
Transmission Dynamics:
In an attempt to investigate the broad-level transmission dynamics of tuberculosis, Porco and Blower
(1998) conduct a time-dependent uncertainty and sensitivity analysis based on previous work. In their model
formulation, individuals can fully recover from TB, and the model does not include treatment parameters. Their
results indicate that most parameters do not significantly affect the severity of the TB epidemic; those that do so
include: disease reactivation rate, fraction of infected individuals who develop TB soon after infection (instead of
a prolonged latent period), number of individuals that an infectious individual infects per year, disease death rate,
and population recruitment rate. Model results were in rough agreement with historical case rate data and
developing country data.
Because transmission is a function of both contact rate and infectivity, Aparicio et al. (2000b) formulate a
deterministic cluster model to specifically explore the impact of intense and long exposure to individuals with
active TB on population level transmission dynamics. In contrast to Porco and Blower (1998), this model does
not assume an average number of individuals infected per year from one infectious case. Specifically, this model
differentiates between epidemiologically active clusters (defined as active when one member has active TB
infection) and casual infections. Model results indicate that casual infections may be as or more important than
cluster-generated secondary infections at a population level. This result is also supported by molecular
epidemiological data (see below). The authors recommend the consideration of a lower bound on cluster size
required for TB persistence as a new way to consider critical epidemic thresholds. Using a spatial stochastic
model, Schinazi (2002) also explores the role of social clusters in disease transmission. Similar to Aparicio et al.
(2000b), results indicate that three parameters influence the transmission of TB: the size of each individual’s
social cluster, and the infection rates within and outside of the cluster. When the infection rate is low outside the
cluster, an epidemic is only possible when the average cluster size and within-cluster infection rate are large
enough. They then compare this to the mean field model with corresponding parameters (homogenous mixing,

8

except by cluster), and discover that the qualitative model behavior is unchanged, indicating that the model
results are robust to mixing heterogeneity.
Though their model is not as detailed as Aparicio et al. (2000b), Song et al. (2002) also model TB with fast
and slow dynamics by considering the roles of close and casual contacts respectively. Their modeling goal is to
try to explicitly understand how population level dynamics emerge from individual behavior without using a
microsimulation. This linkage is important if theoretical models are to be translated into health policy
recommendations. Song et al. incorporate local and individual interactions, assuming that individuals are at risk of
infection from both close contacts in generalized households (clusters) as well as from casual (randomly
distributed) contacts. Like Porco and Blower (1998), the model does not include reinfection, population
structure, or heterogeneous mixing beyond cluster membership. However, unlike Porco and Blower (1998), Song
et al. (2002) does not include recovery or variable times spent in latently infected state.
Most general TB models are either explicitly or implicitly based on developed nations. Yajnik (2003)
notes that such models may not be appropriate for India, because they haven’t considered the inclusion of nonallopathic treatments, private health sector efforts, or gender structure. He therefore attempts to build a
deterministic model of TB dynamics in India; though the model is itself not provided, Yajnik states that there are
47 subpopulations in the model, within which there are divisions by age and gender. Yajnik raises some
important general caveats to TB models: are the populations modeled appropriate to specific human
populations; and are the factors described in the model relevant to the situation to which the model is applied?
For many developing nations, or subpopulations within developed and developing nations, current models may
not address these concerns.
Incorporation of Heterogeneity:
Every population exhibits heterogeneity in a variety of forms. A number of models have tried to
explicitly model such heterogeneous characteristics. Though the root causes of heterogeneity differ between
models, the methodological formulations are similar. These models exhibit a framework that can be reduced to
comparable general models of TB transmission dynamics; however, these models increase the number of explicit
assumptions, and allow for the investigation of a wider range of aspects of TB. Two articles in particular build on
one another (Murphy et al. 2002 & 2003), and are discussed in detail as examples of the inclusion of
heterogeneity in a deterministic model. Additionally, the detail provided elucidates the building of transmission
dynamics models discussed above.
Murphy et al. (2002) explicitly focus their TB model on the effects of heterogeneity in demographically
distinct populations. In a deterministic model, the overall population is split into six subpopulations: for each
group of ‘uninfected with TB,’ ‘latently infected,’ or ‘actively infected,’ there is a group that is genetically neutral
and a group that is genetically susceptible (rates of TB acquisition and progression are higher compared to the
genetically neutral group) toward TB. Though the authors interpret their model in terms of underlying genetic
susceptibility, the results are equally applicable to any environmental or behavior condition that creates variable
susceptibility to TB. There is a constant birth rate, and death rates are dependent on disease status. Active TB
individuals only die from constant disease rate. All births enter into uninfected categories (either genetically
susceptible or neutral). Individuals move from uninfected categories to latently infected or actively infected.
Latently infected individuals move to actively infected. Individuals can leave any population by death, and those
in the actively infected population have a given disease-related death rate. The results indicate that in a
population with a high level of genetic susceptibility, TB prevalence is only slightly affected by changes in
transmission. Conversely, in a population with a small genetically susceptible subpopulation, transmission rates
are more important. The determination of R0 for a heterogeneous population is done here using numerical
simulations. The model makes several biological assumptions for simplicity that differ from other model
configurations, including: 1) Latently infected individuals cannot be reinfected by active TB individuals; 2) there
exists an annual reactivation rate for latently infected individuals; and 3) the contact rates are non-linear. In
Murphy et al. (2003), the same model is expanded to consider how the presence of a genetically susceptible
subpopulation alters the effects of TB treatment at both latent and active stages. It is assumed that treatment
doesn’t confer immunity, but instead it moves individuals from actively infected to latently infected. Treatment
9

of latently infected individuals reduces their reactivation rate. Results indicate that exclusive treatment of latently
infected individuals alone is not as effective as treatment of actively infected individuals alone. Treatment
strategies of latently infected individuals show that low chemotherapy levels have almost no effect on reducing
prevalence regardless of the genetic susceptibility level. Neither model considers MDR-TB, non-compliance
with treatment (or suboptimal compliance; see Biot et al. 2003), or comorbidity.
Also using a deterministic model, demographic non-stability and environmental change over time were
incorporated by Achterberg (2001). To do so, vaccination, population growth, overall well-being, and exposure
are modeled as functions of both contact rate and infectivity per exposure. Though interpreted as environmental
and behavioral change, mathematically this construction is similar to the way in which Murphy et al. (2002 &
2003) incorporate heterogeneity; however, demographic rates are allowed to change over time.
More work must be done on theoretical and qualitative understanding of disease spread in heterogeneous
populations Getz et al. (2006). Past modeling literature on disease epidemiology has tried to include both
exogenous factors that affect disease transmission, and implicit population heterogeneity. However, there is not
a standard way to incorporate these parameters across populations or time. To the extent that idiosyncratic
spatial structures and behavioral distributions can be generalized among populations, an improved understanding
of TB epidemiology will result from modeling heterogeneity.

SPECIFIC BIOLOGICAL QUESTIONS:
In addition to generalized biological models, there are those that are created to address specific questions
in TB biology or epidemiology. There are four main motivating themes in this literature. First, due to the
emergence of molecular epidemiological evidence, there has been an outpouring of models that explicitly utilize,
and investigate the methodology of, these data. Second, the significance of HIV and TB interaction has
motivated a series of models and questions. Third, the emergence of MDR-TB has precipitated a series of
investigations into its evolution and control. Fourth, models have been used to investigate the importance of
exogenous reinfection and the interpretation of the basic reproductive number for TB. Though other topics are
touched upon, these four major motivating themes represent the majority of the biological literature.
Molecular Epidemiological Evidence:
Over the last 10-15 years, the availability of molecular methods to strain-type M. tuberculosis has allowed
the study of previously unknown and unresolved issues in TB epidemiology. Recent work on phenotypic
variation among strains seeks to explore transmissibility, virulence and immunogenicity of strains (Murray and
Nardell 2002). The existence of unsuspected microepidemics has been revealed; recently acquired TB may
significantly contribute to current TB burden in many countries. However, recent molecular methods (primarily
using IS6110-based restriction fragment-length polymorphism) have elucidated the magnitude of these problems
(Small et al. 1994; Branden 1995; Valway et al. 1998; Allos et al. 1996; Bock et al. 1998; Calder et al. 2000; Cardona
et al. 1999; Frieden et al. 1996). These investigations have demonstrated both the utility of TB strain identification
using molecular methods to document infection networks, and the importance of casual contacts in
transmission. Molecular techniques have made it possible to classify cases as clustered or unique, and identify
risk factors for clustering. These clinical and epidemiological studies have motivated significant work in TB
modeling as evidence mounts for the rethinking of TB biology and the interpretation of molecular data.
Molecular fingerprints of TB-postive cases can be used to identify strains of TB. Patients with the same
DNA fingerprint are assumed to have the same strain, and have traditionally been considered to be members of
the same outbreak cluster. To relate molecular TB data to epidemic understanding, Vynnycky et al. (2001)
(expanding on Vynnycky et al. 1999) model the effect of age and study duration on the association between
clustering of DNA fingerprints, and the actual recent transmission of TB (whether patients are members of the
same epidemiological outbreak cluster). Model simplification assumptions include non-age-dependant mixing
patterns, the removal of immigrant-mixed clusters from the data set, and the assumption that the rate of change
of DNA fingerprint patterns is the same for both active disease and latent infection. They find that the
proportion of cases in young people who were molecularly clustered underestimated the proportion of TB
attributable to recent transmission, and overestimated the proportion of recent transmission at older ages.
10

Therefore, the authors caution use of molecular fingerprint clustering as a direct measure of transmission recency
without considering population age and study duration as possible biases. It is not clear to what degree
differences in DNA fingerprint clustering by demographic group reflect contact patterns or actual differences in
transmission recency. Using the same deterministic model (Vynnycky et al. 2001), Vynnycky et al. (2003)
investigate and interpret clustering statistics of different TB strains. Results indicate that in some settings,
clustering is an unreliable indicator of the extent of recent TB transmission. If the annual risk for infection is
changing over time, the long serial interval (the time between successive cases in a chain of transmission) of
tuberculosis makes clustering statistics hard to interpret with regard to transmission recency. This problem may
be greater in developed nations.
Because distributions of fingerprint clusters may reflect social mixing patterns or the differential fitness
of strains, Murray (2002a) uses an individual-based microsimulation model to explore the demographic and
social determinants of cluster distribution, and how transmission dynamics can affect molecular empirical data.
Model results indicate that even when all strains of TB are assumed to be equally fit, multiple host-related factors
contribute to variation in cluster distributions, including: chemotherapy, vaccination, chemoprophylaxis, HIV,
age structure of population, and prevalence of latent TB. Implications for practical studies include: 1) areas with
high prevalence of latent TB may have high strain diversity; 2) control measure success may not be reflected by a
decrease in the mean cluster size; and 3) strain-specific characteristics associated with host factors may appear to
be associated with trends in cluster size due to confounding. Murray (2002b) uses the same model with
stochasticity to specifically address sample size needs in molecular epidemiology of TB. Results indicate that
small samples sizes may systematically bias cluster estimates toward underestimating recent transmission, and the
impact of risk factors for recent transmission, a result that was also suggested by the work of Vynnycky et al.
(2001).
HIV and Comorbidity:
Comorbidity of TB and HIV is explicitly considered in several models that include TB-HIV interaction
and possible treatment options (West and Thompson 1997; Porco et al. 2001; Currie et al. 2003; Getz et al. 2006).
In a deterministic model and numerical analysis, West and Thompson (1997) investigated the magnitude and
duration of the effect that increasing HIV may have on TB. Similarly focused, Porco et al. (2001) use a discrete
event model simulation to predict the potential impact of HIV on the probability and severity of TB outbreaks.
However, while West and Thompson model individuals as having TB stages nested within each stage of HIV,
the stochastic model of Porco et al. is based on four main populations: uninfected individuals; those infected only
with HIV; those infected only with TB; and those dually infected. HIV-positive individuals are further
subdivided by stage of infection—the nesting order is reversed from that used by West and Thompson (1997).
Using available parameter estimates, West and Thompson conclude that the background rate of TB infection,
interaction between subpopulations of HIV stages, and the increase in TB susceptibility for HIV-positive
individuals will have strong effects on future TB incidence in the United States. The model results of Porco et al.
(2001) indicate that at moderate to low TB treatment rates, a moderate HIV epidemic can double the size of TB
outbreaks compared to when HIV is not present. However, when the treatment rate of TB is very high, the
amplification effect of HIV can be significantly reduced. Simulation results agree with molecular epidemiological
data in that the incidence rate of TB is comprised of multiple small and a few large outbreaks. However, these
large outbreaks may occur as a result of chance and not necessarily due to increased strain fitness—there may in
fact be no genetic variability between successful strains and non-outbreak strains. Based on their results, the
authors advocate for both TB and HIV treatment as a means to control TB outbreaks; the presence of HIV does
not negate the value of TB therapeutics in developing nations.
To explicitly consider HIV and TB combined control efforts, Currie et al. (2003) compare TB
chemotherapy with three strategies for prevention, two of which focus directly on HIV treatment, in a
deterministic model. The model includes TB reinfection and treatment failure. They find that even where HIV
prevalence is high, treating active TB is the most effective way to minimize the number of TB cases over the
next 10 years. Treatment of only latent TB is comparatively ineffective over all time scales. Reducing HIV (in
addition to TB chemotherapy) is relatively ineffective over 10 years, but much more effective over 20 years.
11

Though Porco et al. (2001) state that TB therapeutics are not ineffective in the presence of HIV, Getz et al.
(2006) further explore this relationship, and preliminary model results indicate that a 2 month TB treatment
compared to a 6 month treatment regime may offer important benefits that appear to be reduced when HIV
prevalence is high. The model is currently being used to investigate scenarios with increased treatment
compliance, reduced relapse after treatment and enhanced case detection.
Including treatment and progression dynamics of both HIV and TB introduces a high level of
complexity into a model, which is compounded by high levels of uncertainty in parameter values characterizing
both TB and HIV (Getz et al. 2006). To attempt to resolve this uncertainty, Raimundo et al. (2003) use empirical
data from a closed environment to try to better estimate transmission coefficients for both HIV and TB in a
deterministic model. The threshold between absence of infection and endemic basins are analyzed. The
interaction between TB and HIV is considered with data from women incarcerated in the Female Penitentiary of
Sao Paulo State, Brazil. Homogeneous mixing among all individuals is assumed, there is no recovery, and
reinfection (and/or reactivation) exists. Model results indicate that TB can, to some extent, be preventative for
HIV infection when HIV incidence and prevalence are low (and assuming segregation for AIDS patients). On
the other hand, the presence of HIV, even when low, increases rates of TB and speeds progression to active
disease. In combination with the results of Getz et al. (2006), it is clear that the combination of HIV and TB in a
population will increase transmission of each, and limit the treatment of both.
MDR-TB
Given both the increased prevalence, and monetary and human costs of MDR-TB, it is unsurprising that
several authors have built models to investigate the emergence of MDR-TB.
By using a population subdivided into strains of TB with differing fitness, Feng et al. (2002) consider the
emergence of antibiotic resistance by formulating a two-strain deterministic model and numerical simulation.
The movement of individuals from latently infected to actively infected is modeled as an arbitrarily distributed
delay in the drug-sensitive TB strain. Effects of variable periods of latency on disease dynamics, and treatment
failure and its connection to the emergence of drug resistance, are explicitly considered. Model results indicate
that in a homogeneously mixing population, coexistence of naturally resistant strains is limited. However,
antibiotic resistance increases likelihood of strain coexistence. Variable periods of latency do not lead to
qualitatively complex dynamics; however, this is in the absence of heterogeneous contact rates (see above) and
exogenous reinfection (see below), both of which can change tuberculosis dynamics.
Though they use a similar deterministic model to Feng et al. (2002), Cohen and Murray (2004) are
explicitly concerned with treatment and treatment failure as means to control and produce MDR-TB
respectively. Though treatment can fail, a proportion of which results in MDR-TB strains, a proportion of
treatment is successful and individuals are considered immune. Results indicate that if the average relative fitness
of MDR strains is low, and a well-functioning control program is in place, a small subpopulation of relatively fit
MDR strains may eventually out-compete both the drug-sensitive strains and the less fit MDR strains. This
model result has implications for TB control, because MDR-TB strains cannot be contained in the absence of
specific efforts to limit transmission from those with MDR disease. There are several simplifying assumptions to
this model: mixing is homogeneous because contact pattern data are lacking; drug resistance is modeled as a
single-step acquisition process rather than a series of point mutations; and prevalence and incidence estimates are
consistent with developing nations.
Both Feng et al. (2002) and Cohen and Murray (2004) use deterministic models to understand how
MDR-TB arises amongst individuals. In contrast, Blower and Chou (2004) are concerned with the emergence
amongst populations of “hot zones”—an area characterized by the high proportion (>5% prevalence) of drugresistant TB cases. They use a Monte Carlo simulation model to reconstruct possible evolutionary trajectories
and attempt to explore causal factors. Results indicate that levels of MDR are driven by case-finding rates, cure
rates and amplification probabilities. Geographic areas with reduced wild-type strains in the population often
evolved into hot zones, this sometimes occurred even when MDR-TB strains were less fit than wild-type TB
strains. If existing poor TB control programs are not improved, more hot zones will emerge in the future at a
predictable rate. Model results indicate that though the probability of MDR-TB eradication is almost 0, the
12

probability of MDR strains out-competing all other strains is also low. Using time-dependent multivariate
sensitivity analyses, four key, causal factors in hot zone emergence were identified: case detection and treatment
rates, amplification to drug resistance probability, and relative fitness of strains. Despite continued controversy
about the interpretation of R0 for TB (see below), Blower and Chou rely heavily on R0 as a way to identify strains
of TB and compare their fitness.
Though the emphases of these three models differ, the underlying motivations are the same: to
understand how MDR-TB strains come to exist in a population or region, and to explore ways to control or curb
their presence.
R0, Ru and Exogenous Reinfection:
Although the net reproductive number is relatively simple to apply to acute infections, it is difficult to
apply to tuberculosis because of three features of its epidemiology: 1) immunity after exposure may or may not
exist and individuals can be reinfected; 2) the time period between infection and disease can be long and variable,
and is age-dependent, thus the serial interval can be very long; and 3) the nature and probability of contact
among individuals has changed appreciably over calendar time and over the serial interval of the disease. In 1998,
Vynnycky and Fine formulated a model to demonstrate that Ru loses its conventional interpretation if the contact
rate among individuals changes during the time interval between successive cases in a chain of transmission.
Using data from England and Wales since 1900, they model changes in net reproduction number from 19001950, 1950-1960, and 1960-present on white males in the absence of HIV. Vynnycky and Fine (2005) revisit their
previous work (Vynnycky and Fine 1998) and conduct a brief analysis of the history of R0 and Ru, and
interpretations as applied to TB. They find that several properties of TB infection make the application of
reproduction numbers difficult, including the potential for reinfection and the potentially long time period
between successive cases in a chain of transmission. Further, the relative contribution of bacilli from a particular
infection event to a given disease episode remains unknown—a potentially infectious contact has never been
clearly defined. Theoretically speaking, it is debatable whether the concept of herd immunity is relevant for TB at
all, making the continued relevance of Ru as an epidemic threshold value inappropriate. These problems may be
more significant in high prevalence settings, where reinfection may represent a large proportion of TB
morbidity—it isn’t clear which individuals are to be considered susceptible. Vynnycky and Fine (2005) clearly
state one of the major problems with applying R0 theoretically—or Ru practically—to tuberculosis because of its
long natural history time scale: the reproduction number is interpreted as the true transmission potential of an
infection, but is calculated with the assumption (often implicit) that no epidemiological or environmental
changes occur over the time period considered. Clearly, this is true in neither a demographic nor epidemiological
sense. Changing age-structure, contact patterns, comorbidity factors and treatments have radically shifted and
continue to shift in TB endemic countries.
One question that has been debated in the modeling literature is the importance—or existence—of
exogenous reinfection as a means by which latently infected people become actively infected with TB. Feng et al.
(2000) formulated a deterministic model including the effect of exogenous reinfection in the presence of
effective treatment. Because reinfection may play an important role in high prevalence areas, including dense
cities in developed countries, and because risks of exogenous reinfection may differ by the contact rates
experienced by particular individuals, exogenous reinfection must be assessed. The inclusion of exogenous
reinfection in the model shows qualitatively different dynamics from models without reinfection. Analyses
indicate that the model could undergo a backward bifurcation under specific conditions, leading to multiple
stable equilibria 3. The theoretical results indicate that reducing Ru to values less than one may fail to eradicate the
disease, contrary to the standard interpretation of Ru. The authors suggest this subcritical bifurcation may
partially explain the recently observed resurgence of TB prevalence. This state has been discussed by other
epidemic modelers (described in Moghadas and Alexander 2004), but has caused contention amongst TB
Conventional interpretations of Ru indicate that Ru is a transcritical bifurcation, meaning that there are two possible steady state
solutions to the model (Ru>1 and Ru≤1). A backward bifurcation occurs when there are three possible steady state solutions to the
model, depending on additional parameter values.

3

13

modelers. Lipsitch and Murray (2003) review Feng et al. (2000) and state that the model parameters needed to
experience backward bifurcation are biologically unrealistic, because the model failed to include a biological
assumption that latently infected individuals are less likely to progress to active TB by reinfection than are
susceptible individuals, due to some immunity induced by the initial infection. Instead, Lipsitch and Murray
(2003) note that Feng et al. (2000) must use reinfection rates greater than initial rates to obtain backward
bifurcation—something that they assert is biologically implausible.
Using a spatial stochastic model to investigate the roles of endogenous and exogenous reinfection of
latently infected individuals, Schinazi (2003) finds that even in the absence of endogenous reinfection, a TB
epidemic is possible if the exogenous reinfection parameter is high enough. Use of a spatial stochastic model
allows some consideration of heterogeneity by contact rate, and the results differ from a mean field model
approach (which reduces to a model similar to that introduced by Feng et al. 2000). Schinazi states that this is one
of the few cases for which a spatial stochastic model and its corresponding mean field model behave with such
striking differences, indicating that heterogeneity in the demographic features of the population may strongly
affect the epidemiology of TB transmission dynamics.
To explicitly consider the influence of backward bifurcation on interpretation of Ru when TB reinfection
is introduced, Singer and Kirschner (2004) expand upon the model used by Murphy et al. (2002 & 2003). In
addition to the previous model formulations, Singer and Kirschner define an average annual reactivation rate that
is reduced by chemoprophylaxis of latently infected individuals. Results indicate that the onset of backward
bifurcation is unlikely to occur in a realistic epidemic, because it requires that the reinfection rate is higher than
the initial infection rate; this is true for both genetically homogenous and heterogeneous populations. These
results are similar to those found by Lipsitch and Murray (2003). Additionally, when treatment is considered,
backward bifurcation is even less likely to occur. However, they also note that conventional interpretations of Ru
may be confounded by reinfection, because the relationship between Ru and prevalence isn’t linear.
To broaden the reinfection debate, Gomes et al. (2004) use a deterministic model to investigate a
reinfection threshold in relation to vaccination. They are concerned with both reinfection and its significance,
and vaccine efficacy and variability. They detect a reinfection threshold (potentially different from Ru) above
which reinfection is the principal type of transmission and vaccination fails. This explanation is based on three
postulates: 1) the transmission potential varies among populations based on demographic differences; 2)
exposure to TB induces an immune response partially protective against reinfection; and 3) this protection is not
significantly improved by BCG vaccination. Vaccination also does not confer complete immunity, being
formulated in the same way as the recovered subpopulation (though rates are allowed to differ). When
vaccination reduces susceptibility by a factor other than that conferred by infection, the transmission threshold
for vaccine protection varies. This variation may account for the broad trends seen in BCG efficacy and TB
prevalence, though the model has not been sufficiently increased in complexity to be tested with heterogeneities
in the epidemiological data. Gomes et al. (2004) note that their model formulation relies heavily on measures of
immune protection, and that these parameter values are not agreed upon in the tuberculosis literature; the degree
to which infection confers protection, and the degree to which that protection, or that conferred by vaccination,
wanes over time is unclear. Nonetheless, they suggest that the inclusion of reinfection threshold concepts may be
important to understanding TB in future models.
By including a generalized reinfection rate as a function of the number of actively infected individuals,
Moghadas and Alexander (2004) revisit the question of exogenous reinfection. The model results indicate that
exogenous reinfection may be a major cause of TB emergence, especially in high prevalence areas, within
reasonable parameter values. This paper is novel because it extends upon previous studies of exogenous
reinfection, and shows the feasibility of backward bifurcation and thus the presence of multiple stable equilibria
under realistic parameter values and assumptions. Moghadas and Alexander note that their model results are in
agreement with clinical studies, demonstrating that exogenous reinfection can and does occur, especially in high
prevalence areas. This model was constructed to provide a theoretical framework supported by clinical studies. It
demonstrates the presence of backward bifurcation, leading to the existence of multiple endemic equilibria over a
sizable region of the realistic parameter space. However, the proportionate contribution of reinfection to the
14

overall TB burden is unclear. Future model extensions could include control strategies, which are not currently
included.
In a review of the molecular epidemiological evidence, Murray and Nardell (2002) conclude that
exogenous reinfection does, without a doubt, exist. Reinfection with a second strain of TB can occur in
immunocompetent and immunocompromised individuals. However, molecular studies have not indicated how
many cases are attributable to exogenous reinfection in people previously infected with TB. This would require
M. tuberculosis isolates from two distinct episodes of disease in these individuals. Insufficient data collection has
limited experimental work from a molecular standpoint. Chiang and Riley (2005) conduct an extensive literature
review of experimental and epidemiological work on exogenous reinfection of TB and find that there is
substantial evidence of both types to support the role of exogenous reinfection. However, only those models
that incorporate an annual risk of infection can provide a quantitative estimate of the relative contribution of
reinfection to TB burden. The authors call for better estimates in the contribution of exogenous reinfection to
TB incidence in the consideration of TB control strategies.

DISCUSSION:
This paper reviews the applications of mathematical tuberculosis models in the last 10 years, and the
biological bases for, and conclusions drawn from, these models. The history of dynamic TB modeling dates back
to the 1960s, when models were used to predict the effects of particular interventions. Due to declining rates of
TB in developed nations, and the increase in successful use of chemotherapy and chemoprophylaxis, there was
little pressure to further investigate the epidemiology of TB, therefore little modeling work was done from the
1970s to 1990s. The reemergence of TB as a major public health threat has prompted modeling efforts in the last
decade. This work generally aims to investigate which variables control patterns of infection in individuals and
groups, and how these variables are related to population-level prevalence.
Though there has been some work exploring TB in non-human species, and some models have taken an
intra-individual focus, the majority are deterministic or stochastic models used to investigate inter-individual TB
transmission dynamics. There are two broad classes of models, applied and theoretical, though these are not
mutually exclusive designations. The applied models have emphasized environmental controls, including
nosocomial infections (Gammaitoni & Nucci 1997; Nicas & Seto 1997; Ko et al. 2001; Beggs et al. 2003), and
transmission aboard a commercial airliner (Ko et al. 2004). Population-level control measures have also been
explored, including global TB control strategy extensions (Murray & Salomon 1998), U.S. incidence predictions
(Debanne et al. 2000), vaccination options and strategies (Lietman & Blower 2000), treatment default rates and
economic outcomes (Biot et al. 2003), and refuge camp guidelines (Ssematimba et al. 2005). Historical trends have
been analyzed to explain past patterns in TB prevalence and incidence at different population levels (Vynnycky &
Fine 1999; Pitman et al. 2002; Aparicio et al. 2000a; Aparicio et al. 2002).
General models of TB dynamics attempt to gain biological and epidemiological insight into TB
transmission and inclusion of heterogeneity. Depending on model formulation, different aspects have been
investigated, including: disease reactivation (Porco & Blower 1998); distribution of latency duration (Porco &
Blower 1998); clusters and casual contacts (Aparicio et al. 2000b; Schinazi 2002; Song et al. 2002); and population
specific demographics (Yajnik 2003). Heterogeneity may be important at many levels in understanding TB
dynamics; this literature begins to explore the complex relationships among individuals, populations and TB.
Genetic susceptibility to TB is one possible form of population heterogeneity explored by Murphy et al. (2002
and 2003), as is demographic non-stability as affected by TB prevalence (Achterberg 2001). Molecular evidence
and strain typing have allowed for new insights and modeling challenges. Strain clustering (Vynnycky et al. 2001),
methodological bias (Vynnycky et al. 2001), population cluster determinants (Murray 2002a; Murray 2002b), and
infection recency (Vynnycky et al. 2001; Murray 2002a; Vynnycky et al. 2003) have all been addressed using
mathematical models. The increasing importance of HIV and TB interaction in understanding each disease is
reflected in the increasing amount of comorbidity modeling literature. Investigating the effects of HIV on TB
transmission and morbidity (Porco et al. 2001; Raimundo et al. 2003; Getz et al. 2006), and HIV and TB treatment
15

and control efforts (West & Thompson 1997; Porco et al. 2001; Getz et al. 2006) represent the largest foci of
these articles. The variation in TB-strain fitness and MDR-TB evolution are major concerns (Feng et al. 2002;
Blower & Chou 2004; Cohen & Murray 2004). The qualitative and quantitative understanding of the basic
reproduction number and questions of exogenous reinfection are intimately tied in the TB modeling literature
(Vynnycky & Fine 1998; Feng et al. 2000; Lipsitch & Murray 2003; Schinazi 2003; Singer & Kirschner 2004;
Gomes et al. 2004; Moghadas & Alexander 2004; Vynnycky & Fine 2005; Getz et al. 2006). This academic
dialogue reflects the unresolved biological and epidemiological issues surrounding TB dynamics.
These topics represent the major foci of TB modeling literature in the last decade. Advances in TB
modeling literature have been governed by advances in mathematics more so than biology (with the exception of
models motivated by recent molecular evidence). This is both because of the rapid advances in mathematical
techniques allowed by computers, and the lack of biological information about TB itself. TB models are
therefore used to generate and address both mathematical and biological questions; occasionally these come into
conflict. Such conflict can most readily be seen in the ongoing debate about the importance of exogenous
reinfection, but may also govern areas of exploration. For example, the lack of emphasis in the literature on
generalized households stems from a bias toward simpler mathematic and analytic solutions, rather than from
TB epidemiology (Aparicio et al. 2000b). Model formulation decisions largely determine the model results; given
that there is remarkable dissimilarity about salient features of TB epidemiology among models, it is not surprising
that multiple conclusions have been reached. Some of the discrepancy between models may be attributed to the
selection of a template model; this is often a function of research group more than an articulated decision
process. Beyond formulation decisions, parameter estimation is often not well guided by biological literature
(because such literature is insufficient). Modelers are forced to reconcile mathematical solutions with biological
plausibility, often without sufficient, reliable information. Simple dynamic models attempt to capture the essence
of a complex situation in a few key factors. They are used to explain qualitative patterns of behavior. More
realistic models attempt to estimate reality with the inclusion of many more factors. These must be implemented
by computer rather than mathematical analysis, and can produce quantitative predictions. Despite their greater
potential realism, the number of parameters that must be specified is large, and often represent values about
which little is biologically or epidemiologically understood. Consequently, extensive sensitivity analyses are used
to “solve” the models, which often means results are consistent with many different interpretations that may or
may not reflect underlying biological realities (Cox et al. 2005). In sum, all tuberculosis modelers must make two
decisions, often without biological data: what parameters to put in (which modeling simplifications are
appropriate for which questions), and how to get realistic values for those parameters. The ambiguity
surrounding these modeling decisions is often criticized, as shown in a quote from WHO:
The first model builders in tuberculosis met with considerable opposition from those who maintained that many essential
parameters were not established with sufficient precision, although paradoxically, those very opponents apparently had
their own intuitive models on which to base highly assertive decisions.
--World Health Organization, 1973 (as quoted in Lietman & Blower 2000)

Though tuberculosis models are constructed with significant assumptions, and lack biological data on
which to base parameter estimates, their value lies in making such assumptions and gaps explicit. The cultural
divide between mathematical modelers and epidemiologists can result in miscommunication about the roles of
biological assumptions. By quantifying biological assumptions, models provide a framework by which to
understand possible outcomes, and more importantly can prioritize epidemiological research by identifying key
factors in tuberculosis dynamics. Nonetheless, building ever-more complex models should not be the goal; TB
modelers must still communicate their methods and conclusions to a diverse set of researchers.
Despite the influx of information from molecular TB studies, some major questions remain unresolved
because the natural history of the disease makes its study difficult: surveys based on tuberculin skin test are hard
to interpret because of the cross-reactivity of BCG vaccine; case notification data underestimates TB burden; and
in the recent past, it was impossible to trace pathways of transmission within populations (Murray and Nardell
2002). Because of these data collection difficulties, major unresolved problems include: true definition of
16

potentially infectious contact; contact patterns and their determinants; contribution of reactivation and
reinfection; risk factors for primary disease; coinfection with HIV and its effect on transmission; the
infectiousness of smear-negative TB; relative fitness of TB strains; effects of population genetic and behavioral
heterogeneity; evolution of MDR-TB; understanding endemic thresholds when there is a long serial interval and
changing demography; and applications of general models to specific populations. Future work with
mathematical TB models can help address these unresolved issues.
Overall, one-third of the world’s population is currently infected with tuberculosis, with one new
infection every second. Considering active TB only, the World Health Organization estimated global incidence in
2003 to be 62 per 100,000, with deaths from TB totaling 28 per 100,000. HIV is a strong risk factor for
developing TB, and TB is the leading cause of death among HIV-positive people. Necessary for any effective
disease control is knowledge about the biology of disease pathogens, clinical manifestations of disease, and
disease epidemiology. Tuberculosis epidemiology is the study of interactions between humans and M. tuberculosis;
questions about TB evolution, transmission dynamics, and control must consider the interaction with human
environments and behavior. Though this is true for all contagious disease, the long serial interval, and intra- and
inter-individual natural history of TB make the consideration of human demography and behavior particularly
crucial for understanding TB dynamics. Because humans modify their environment biologically and socially, an
understanding of population structure and social interaction must be combined with the biology of tuberculosis
to understand TB transmission dynamics and evolution. As the impact of tuberculosis on global public health
continues to increase, the importance of qualitatively and quantitatively understanding factors affecting TB
transmission and control also increases.

17

BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Achterberg JT (2001) Generalized Mathematical Modeling of Tuberculosis within a Population. B.A. Honors Thesis,
Schreyer Honors College, The Pennsylvania State University.
Akhtar S, Carpenter TE, Rathi SK (2006) A chain-binomial model for intra-household spread of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis in a low socio-economic setting in Pakistan. Epidemiology and Infection. 2006 Jun 2:1-7 [Epub
ahead of print].
Allos B M, Bensheimer K F, Bloch A B. Management of an outbreak of tuberculosis in a small community. Ann
Intern Med 1996; 125: 114–117.
Aparicio JP, Capurro AF, Castillo-Chavez C (2000a) On the fall and rise of tuberculosis. Technical Report.
Department of Biometrics, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Cornell University.
Aparicio JP, Capurro AF, Castillo-Chavez C (2000b) Transmission and dynamics of tuberculosis on generalized
households. Journal of Theoretical Biology. 206:327-341.
Aparicio JP, Capurro AF, Castillo-Chavez C (2002) Markers of disease evolution: the case of tuberculosis. Journal
of Theoretical Biology. 215:227-237.
Beggs CB, Noakes CJ, Sleigh PA, Fletcher LA, Siddiqi K (2003) The transmission of tuberculosis in confined
spaces: an analytical review of alternative epidemiological models. The international journal of tuberculosis and
lung disease. 7(11):1015-1026.
Berkey CS, Hoaglin DC, Mosteller F, Colditz GA (1995) A Random-Effects Regression Model for MetaAnalysis. Statistics in Medicine. 14, 395-411.
Biot M, D. Chandramohan D, Porter JDH (2003) Tuberculosis treatment in complex emergencies: are risks
outweighing benefits? Tropical Medicine & International Health. 8(3):211.
Blower, S.M., Small, P.M. & Hopewell, P.C. (1996). Control strategies for tuberculosis epidemics: new models
for old problems. Science. 273, 497-500.
Blower SM, Chou T (2004) Modeling the emergence of the 'hot zones': tuberculosis and the amplification
dynamics of drug resistance. Nature Medicine. 10(10):1111-1116.
Bock N, Mallory J, Mobley N. Outbreak of tuberculosis associated with a floating card game in the rural south:
lessons for tuberculosis contact investigations. Clin Infect Dis 1998; 27: 1221–1226.
Braden C R, Investigative Team. Infectiousness of a university student with laryngeal and cavitary tuberculosis.
Clin Infect Dis 1995; 21: 565–570.
Brogger S (1967) Systems analysis in tuberculosis control: A model. American Review of Respiratory Disease. 95, 419434.
Calder L, Hampton L, Prentice D, et al. A school and community outbreak of tuberculosis in Auckland. N Zeal
Med J 2000; 113: 71–74.
Cardona M, Bek M D, Mills K, Isaacs D, Alperstein G. Transmission of tuberculosis from a seven-year-old child
in a Sydney school. J Paed Child Health 1999; 35: 375–378.
Castillo-Chavez C, Song B (2004) Dynamical Models Of Tuberculosis And Their Applications. Mathematical
Biosciences and Engineering. 1(2):361–404.
Centers for Disease Control (2005) Questions and Answers about TB. National Center for HIV, STD, and TB
Prevention: Division of Tuberculosis. http://www.cdc.gov/nchstp/tb/faqs/qa.htm. Viewed November
2005.
Chiang CY, Riley LW (2005) Exogenous reinfection in tuberculosis. Lancet Infectious Disease. 5:629-636.
Chaulk CP, Friedman M, Dunning R (2000) Modeling the epidemiology and economics of directly observed
therapy in Baltimore. International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease. 4(3), 201-207.
Classen CN, Warren R, Richardson M, Hauman JH, Gie RP, Ellis JHP, van Helden PD, Beyers N (1999) Impact
of social interaction in the community on the transmission of tuberculosis in a high incidence area.
Thorax. 54, 136-140.
Cohen T, Murray M (2004) Modeling epidemics of multidrug-resistant M. tuberculosis of heterogeneous fitness.
Nature Medicine. 10(10):1117-1121.
18

Corbett EL, Watt CJ, Walker N, Maher D, Williams BG, Raviglione MC, Dye C (2003) The growing burden of
tuberculosis: Global trends and interactions with the HIV epidemic. Archives of Internal Medicine
163(9):1009-1021.
Cox CR, Donnelly CA, Bourne FJ, Gettinby G, McInerney JP, Morrison WI, Woodroffe R (2005) Simple model
for tuberculosis in cattle and badgers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 102(49):17588-17593.
Currie CSM, Williams BG, Cheng RCH, Dye C (2003) Tuberculosis epidemics driven by HIV: is prevention
better than cure? AIDS. 17(17):2501-2508.
Daley CL, Kawamura LM (2003) The role of molecular epidemiology in contact investigations: a US perspective.
Int J tuberc lung dis 7(12):S458-S462.
Debanne SM, Bielefeld RA, Cauthen GM, Daniel TM, Rowland DY (2000) Multivariate Markovian modeling of
tuberculosis: forecast for the United States. Emerging Infectious Diseases. 6(2):148-158.
Dye, Christopher & Williams, Brian G. (2000). Criteria for the control of drug-resistant tuberculosis. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences. 97, 8180-8185.
Feng Z, Castillo-Chavez C, Capurro AF (2000) A model for tuberculosis with exogenous reinfection. Theoretical
Population Biology. 57:235-247.
Feng Z, Iannelli M, Milner MA (2002) A two-strain tuberculosis model with age of infection. SIAM journal on
applied mathematics. 62(5):1634-1656.
Ferebee SH (1967) An epidemiological model of tuberculosis in the United States. NTA Bulletin, January, 4-7.
Frieden T R, Sherman L F, Maw K L. A multi-institutional outbreak of highly drug-resistant tuberculosis:
epidemiology and clinical outcomes. JAMA 1996; 276: 1229–1235.
Gammaitoni L, Nucci MC (1997) Using a mathematical model to evaluate the efficacy of TB control measures.
Emerging Infectious Diseases. 3(3):335-342.
Getz WM, Lloyd-Smith JO, Cross PC, Bar-David S, Johnson PL, Porco TC, Sanchez MS (2006 (print available
2005)) Modeling the Invasion and Spread of Contagious Diseases in Heterogeneous Populations. In:
Disease Evolution: Models, Concepts, And Data Analyses (Dimacs Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical
Computer Science). (Feng Z, Dieckmann U, Levin SA, eds).
Golub JE, Bur S, Cronin WA, Gange S, Baruch N, Comstock GW, Chaisson RE (2006) Delayed tuberculosis
diagnosis and tuberculosis transmission. The international journal of tuberculosis and lung disease. 10(1):24-30.
Gomes MG, Franco AO, Gomes MC, Medley GF (2004) The reinfection threshold promotes variability in
tuberculosis epidemiology and vaccine efficacy. Proceedings. Biological sciences / The Royal Society.
271(1539):617-23
Hethcote HW (2000) The Mathematics of Infectious Diseases. SIAM Review. 42(4):599-653.
Horne N (1998). Tuberculosis and Other Mycobacterial Diseases. In: Manson’s Tropical Diseases 20th ed. (Cook,
G.C.) pp. 971-1015. London: W.B. Saunders Company Ltd.
Kirschner D J(1999) Dynamics of Co-infection with M. tuberculosis and HIV-1. Theoretical Population Biology.
55:94-109.
Ko G, Thompson KM, Nardell EA (2004) Estimation of Tuberculosis Risk on a Commercial Airliner. Risk
Analysis. 24:379.
Ko G, Burge HA, Nardell EA, Thompson KM (2001) Estimation of Tuberculosis Risk and Incidence under
Upper Room Ultraviolet Germicidal Irradiation in a Waiting Room in a Hypothetical Scenario. Risk
Analysis. 21(4):657-674.
Lietman T, Blower SM (2000) Potential impact of tuberculosis vaccines as epidemic control agents. Clinical
Infectious Diseases. Suppl 3:S316-22.
Lipsitch M, Murray MB (2003) Letter: multiple equilibria: tuberculosis transmission require unrealistic
assumptions. Theoretical Population Biology. 63:169-170.
Moghadas SM, Alexander ME (2004) Exogenous reinfection and resurgence of tuberculosis: a theoretical
framework. Journal of Biological Systems. 12(2):231-247.
Murphy BM, Singer BH, Anderson S, Kirschner D (2002) Comparing epidemic tuberculosis in demographically
distinct heterogeneous populations. Mathematical Biosciences. 180:161-85.
19

Murphy BM, Singer BH, Kirschner D (2003) On treatment of tuberculosis in heterogeneous populations. Journal
of Theoretical Biology. 223 (4): 391-404.
Murray CJL, Salomon JA (1998) Modeling the impact of global tuberculosis control strategies. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences. 95: 13881-13886.
Murray M (2002a) Determinants of cluster distribution in the molecular epidemiology of tuberculosis. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences. 99(3):1538-1543.
Murray M (2002b) Sampling Bias in the Molecular Epidemiology of Tuberculosis. Emerging Infectious Diseases.
8(4):363-9.
Murray M, Nardell E (2002) Molecular epidemiology of tuberculosis: achievements and challenges to current
knowledge. Bulletin of the World Health Organization 80(6):477-482.
Nicas M, Seto E (1997) A Simulation Model for Occupational Tuberculosis Transmission. Risk Analysis.
17(5):609-616.
Perelman MI, Marchuk GI, Borisov SE, Kazennykh BY, Avilov KK, Karkach AS, Romanyukha AA (2004)
Tuberculosis epidemiology in Russia: the mathematical model and data analysis Russian Journal of
Numerical Analysis and Mathematical Modelling. 19(4):305-314.
Pitman R, Jarman B, Coker R (2002) Tuberculosis transmission and the impact of intervention on the incidence
of infection. The International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease. 6(6):485-491.
Porco TC, Blower SM (1998) Quantifying the intrinsic transmission dynamics of tuberculosis. Theoretical
Population Biology. 54:117-132.
Porco TC, Small PM, Blower SM (2001) Amplification Dynamics: Predicting the Effect of HIV on Tuberculosis
Outbreaks. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes. 28(5):437-444.
Raimundo SM, Engel AB, Yang HM, Bassanezi RC (2003) An Approach to Estimating the Transmission
Coefficients for AIDS and for Tuberculosis Using Mathematical Models. Systems Analysis Modelling
Simulation. 43(4):423 – 442.
ReVelle CS (1967) The economics allocation of tuberculosis control activities in developing nations. Cornell University.
Rose AMC, Watson JM, Grahm C, Nunn AJ, Drobniewske F, Ormerod LP, Darbyshire JH, Leese J (2001)
Tuberculosis at the end of the 20th century in England and Wales: results of a national survey in 1998.
Thorax. 56, 173-179.
Sattenspiel L (2000) Tropical Environments, Human Activities, and the Transmission of Infectious Diseases.
Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 43:3-31.
Sattenspiel L, Simon CP (1988). The Spread and Persistence of Infectious Diseases in Structured Populations.
Math Biosci 90:341-366.
Schinazi RB (2002) On the role of social clusters in the transmission of infectious diseases. Theoretical Population
Biology. 61:163-169.
Schinazi RB (2003) On the role of reinfection in the transmission of infectious diseases. Journal of Theoretical
Biology. 225:59-63.
Segovia-Juarez JL, Ganguli S, Kirschner D (2004) Identifying control mechanisms of granuloma formation
during M. tuberculosis infection using an agent-based model. Journal of Theoretical Biology. 231:357–376.
Singer B, Kirschner DE (2004) Influence of backward bifurcation on interpretation on R 0 in a model of
epidemic tuberculosis with reinfection. Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering. 1(1):81–93.
Small PM, Hopewell PC, Singh SP, Paz A, Parsonnet J, Ruston DC, Schecter GF, Delay CL, Schoolnik GK
(1994) The epidemiology of tuberculosis in San Francisco: A population-based study using conventional
and molecular methods. The New England Journal of Medicine 330:1703-1709.
Song B, Castillo-Chavez C, Aparicio JP (2002) Tuberculosis models with fast and slow dynamics: the role of
close and casual contacts. Mathematical Biosciences. 180:187-205.
Ssematimba A, Mugisha JYT, Luboobi LS (2005) Mathematical Models for the Dynamics of Tuberculosis in
Density-dependent Populations: The Case of Internally Displaced Peoples' Camps (IDPCs) in Uganda.
Journal of Mathematics and Statistics. 1(3): 217-224.
Tanaka MM, Small PM, Salamon H, Feldman MW (2000) The dynamics of repeated elements: Applications to
the epidemiology of tuberculosis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 97(7):3532-3537.
20

Toossi, Zahra & Ellner, Jerrold J. (1998). Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Other Mycobacteria. In: Infectious Diseases
2nd ed. (Gorbach, Sherwood L., Bartlett, Joh G., Blacklow, Neil R., eds) pp. 2299-2307. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders Company.
Valway S E, Sanchez M P C, Shinnick T F, et al. An outbreak involving extensive transmission of a virulent strain
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 1998; 338: 633–639.
Vynnycky E, Borgdorff MW, van Soolingen D, Fine PEM (2003) Annual Mycobacterium tuberculosis Infection
Risk and Interpretation of Clustering Statistics. Emerging Infectious Diseases. 9(2):176-83.
Vynnycky E, Fine PEM (1998) The long-term dynamics of tuberculosis and other diseases with long serial
intervals: implications of and for changing reproduction numbers. Epidemiology and Infection. 121:309-324.
Vynnycky E, Fine PEM (1999) Interpreting the decline in tuberculosis: the role of secular trends in effective
contact. International Journal of Epidemiology. 28: 327-334.
Vynnycky E, Fine PEM (2005) 13. The application of reproduction number concepts to tuberculosis.
Epidemiology and Infection. 133: S45-S47.
Vynnycky E, Nagelkerke N, Borgdorff MW, Van Soolingen D, Van Embden JDA, Fine PEM (2001) The effect
of age and study duration on the relationship between ‘clustering’ of DNA fingerprint patterns and the
proportion of tuberculosis disease attributable to recent transmission. Epidemiology and Infection. 126: 4362.
Waaler H, Geser A, Andersen S (1962). The use of mathematical models in the study of the epidemiology of
tuberculosis. American Journal of Public Health. 52, 1002-1013.
West RW, Thompson JR (1997) Modeling the impact of HIV on the spread of tuberculosis in the United States.
Mathematical Biosciences. 143:35-60.
World Health Organization. (2005). Tuberculosis. WHO Information: Fact Sheets. Viewed November 2005.
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs104/en/index.html
World Health Organization. (2000a). DOTS; Directly Observed Treatment Short-course. Tuberculosis: Strategy &
Operations. http://www.who.int/gtb/dots/index.htm.
World Health Organization. (2000b). Tuberculosis and BCG. Vaccines, Immunization and Biologicals. Viewed
November 2005. http://www.who.int/vaccines/intermediate/tuberculosis.htm.
Yajnik KS (2003) A Mathematical Model For Simulation Of Changes In Tuberculosis Prevalence Due To
Enhanced Intervention. Health Administrator. XV(1-2):182-185.

21

